Red Bull Music Academy — Rave Culture & Acid House

Source: Red Bull Music Academy Daily (daily.redbullmusicacademy.com)
Citation Tier: 2 (established music publication)
Articles: 8

---

Title: Smiley Culture: The Symbiotic Relationship Between Acid And The Smiley Face
Author: Chris Sullivan
Date: 2011-12-13
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2011/12/smiley-culture-rave-feature

Smiley Culture: The Symbiotic Relationship Between Acid And The Smiley Face
Prominent early-rave figurehead, musician, promoter and artist Chris Sullivan explains the connection between acid house and that damn smiley-face.
In 1980, concerned individuals began returning from the US with tales of all-night, alcohol-free clubs such as New York’s Paradise Garage, a new brand of disco, and pocketfuls of a mad-arsed powder called MDA. By about ’86, certain types were growing their hair and dressing in a somewhat hippy fashion. DJs such as Hector Heathcote and Morris Watson showcased cassettes full of music by the likes of Juan Atkins and Frankie Knuckles that was not only minimal and electronic, but also fresher than a dozen daisies.
And so it went until May ’87 when Kym Mazelle, Ce Ce Rogers and Marshall Jefferson played The Wag club in Soho. In that summer, DJs Eddie Richards and Colin Faver put on London’s first official rave at Staples Corner, followed by Gary Haisman (later the singer of We Call It Acieed! by D. Mob) and Paul Oakenfold’s seminal event in a car park on Marble Arch playing full-on Chicago acid, including an appearance from Knuckles and his protégé, Jamie Principle, who sang their influential "Baby Wants to Ride". And so the goose was cooked. In acid.
Yet it took a little while for the bird to reach the table. After a trip to Ibiza (where curiously little house music was played) DJs Danny Rampling, Oakenfold and Nicky Holloway came back with a mission. In November ’87, Rampling started Shoom in Bermondsey; weeks later, Oakie opened Future in Heaven, Charing Cross, while yours truly started Afters in Clink Street – all of which played house in its gloriously mind-melting acid incarnation. Of course, the appearance of said fowl on the London party animal’s menu had been facilitated by the arrival of a HUGE batch of ecstasy that, in tablet form, had doves stamped on them, were outrageously potent and sold for a massive £20 a pop.
Suddenly everyone was E’d off their trolley and, hand-in-hand with the music and the Doves, came the attitude and the garb. Punters began growing their hair into ponytails, sporting dungarees and Kickers, garments that allowed them to move freely and, if truth were told, sweat their bollocks off. But the one signature garment was the Smiley t-shirt.
The first version of the Smiley face we now know was designed by the freelance artist Harvey Ball (who earned $45 for the job) in 1963. He created it for the State Life Assurance Company, who used it as a badge to boost the morale of their workforce. By 1971, more than 50 million Smiley badges had been sold in the US, while in the UK it was adopted by the Windsor Free Rock Festival in 1972.
Second-time round, the first person I saw with a Smiley t-shirt was Barnzley Armitage, now co-designer of A Child Of The Jago label with Vivienne Westwood’s son, Joe Corre, who wore it as an ironic nod to the Summer of Love in ’67. “I was into all this 70s rare groove stuff [in about ’86],” recalls Barnzley, “so I thought I’d do something 70s American and printed up all these Smiley t-shirts that me and Tim Simenon used to wear. Next thing I know, Danny Rampling nicked it and used it as the logo for his club, Shoom.”
Shoom’s graphics designer, George Georgiou, explains: “Danny insisted I use the Smiley-face symbol, which I wasn’t that keen on. So I made the Smileys tumble down the page either side of the text. Of course they looked like pills, which people picked up on.”
Consequently, Simenon, of Bomb The Bass, put it on the sleeve of his record Beat Dis, i-D magazine put it on their cover and, suddenly, the t-shirt became the uniform for millions of ravers. “When you saw someone in a Smiley t-shirt you knew exactly what you were getting,” recalls DJ/producer/writer Terry Farley. “It signified acid house and everything that went with it.”
What else should a gurning, loved-up, sweaty, spaced-out club monster wear other than a t-shirt with a big smiling face on it? In short, it said it all.
[Ed. note - This article was originally published during the 2010 Academy in London as part of the Daily Note newspaper. Also, interesting to note that the Smiley played a prominent role in recent times as the de-facto character in Wal-Mart commercials. Weird.]

---

Title: Warrior Charge: The Birth of UK Soundsystem Culture
Author: Melissa Bradshaw
Date: 2013-04-15
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/04/warrior-charge-the-birth-of-uk-soundsystem-culture-feature

Warrior Charge: The Birth of UK Soundsystem Culture
Since taking root in the UK in the ’50s, soundsystem culture has massively impacted British musical history. Beginning as a focal point for the first Caribbean communities, soundsystems became a powerful force in the encounter between black Britain and racism. But the history of soundsystems is also a story of joy. They have turned the nation of the stiff upper lip and starched collar into a land of ravers, making London one of the most vibrant music capitals of the world. Let’s rewind.
Duke Vin and Count Suckle arrived in England in 1954, stowaways on a boat from Kingston. They had both been soundmen (DJs) in Jamaica, where soundsystems had evolved from a means for bars and shops to attract customers into big, competitive parties known as dancehalls, despite being staged outdoors. Vin built a soundsystem that he called Tickler in 1955, Suckle’s followed shortly after. They held residencies and vied for crowd loyalty in Ladbroke Grove, then a hinterland for the law. But ska, the sped-up Jamaican adaptation of jazz and R&B that they played, was upbeat and optimistic. Count Suckle later founded the Roaring Twenties, a legendary club in Carnaby Street that attracted tourists and celebrities alongside Suckle’s regular following.
Although soundsystems were primarily Jamaican, other Caribbean immigrants in London were drawn to the lifestyle. Dennis Bovell, a Barbadian who moved to London in 1965, aged 12, had a hand in many of the most important shifts in British reggae. “Immediately I landed in the soundsystem culture because my dad had an amplifier and a couple of boxes, and in them days that was a soundsystem. If you had a 50-watt amp and four or five speakers, enough to put one in every room of a party and enough wire to run it, that was a soundsystem. My dad was a bus driver and knew lots of busmen, my mum was a nurse and knew lots of nurses. So busmen and nurses came from all over.”
Bovell’s father would take his system, called Tropical Soundmaster, to play at “blues parties” at his own or friends’ houses, as well as weddings and christenings, sometimes playing for free, “for some beer or some weed.” He’d get records sent by mail order from Jamaica and the USA, ensuring a good following because “he was known to have a great record collection.”
Back then, the only way you could hear reggae was on a soundsystem.
Bovell can reel off a long list of the other soundsystems around. In southwest London there was Count Benji – “a great soundsystem he was” – one of what Bovell calls the “big four” of the late ’60s along with Duke Reid, Sir Coxsone (London soundsystems regularly nicked the names of their famous Jamaican counterparts) and Neville the Enchanter. In the north, there was Count Shelley and Fatman, to the west, Duke Vin, whose system was less mighty than most. Bovell recalls, “I’ve heard him say it wasn’t even a soundsystem really, it was a radiogram! Nowadays you’d be laughed off the scene with that. But in those days a ten-watt amplifier was a big deal! And then it grew and grew and grew until my generation had soundsystems like King Tubby’s.” It wasn’t confined to London – big systems sprang up in Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol and Huddersfield. They spurred the growth of what was a then-new subsection of the record industry. “Back then, the only way you could hear reggae was on a soundsystem,” Bovell remembers.
Entrepreneurs took advantage of the demand they created, importing records played in the soundsystem, then selling them on people’s doorsteps. Later, labels emerged first for Jamaican, then UK artists’ music. Early owners included Chris Blackwell, the founder of Island, and Lee Gopthal, who ran Trojan, which dominated the British market in the late ’60s and early ’70s.
Music became a focal point of the social whirl. The record shops were listening centres and meeting places. Attached to every system was a crew arranged in a hierarchy, from system owner to selector (who selected the discs), deejay (the man on the mic), down to the box carriers, who moved the system from show to show. To be credible, a reggae group had to be attached to a soundsystem. At shows, systems had primacy over groups, not vice versa. “I used soundsystems to broaden appreciation of my music,” says Bovell, who played in the band Matumbi. Joining a system called Sufferah’s Hi-Fi, they’d play and play Matumbi songs until people knew the songs and wanted to own them.
Matumbi were at the helm of a second generation of UK soundsystems, one more independent from their Jamaican forebears. The name Sufferah was one manifestation: people were shocked that they hadn’t given it a traditional Jamaican soundsystem name. More UK names popped up, like Lord David, Mombasa and, eventually, Jah Shaka, who, says Bovell, is “still to this day the monarch.”
As reggae music and the sheer number of systems increased in the ’70s, there was growing demand for new music. Despite a lingering prejudice in favour of Jamaican tracks, soundmen began looking to homegrown sources. Still, Bovell tricked a lot of them into buying Matumbi’s pre-releases, making them look like they were pressed abroad. “We were accused of not being able to play reggae like Jamaicans, so I set out to disprove that. I made a set of records in this country without putting on any information about who was on the recording. And when I made my 7-inch pressings, I dinked them!”
Dinking is the practice of cutting a big hole in the centre of a 7-inch record, like the Jamaican editions, which was how people differentiated between imports and those pressed in England. Selectors failed to spot the difference, forcing them to acknowledge that British reggae could be as good as its Jamaican parent.
Your chest vibrated and your trouser leg too – we shook the place apart!
Sufferah’s soundsystem was comprised of four 600-watt amplifiers and 40 18-inch speakers, the ultimate goal being not volume but quality of vibration. They had a residency at the Metro club on the corner of Tavistock Road in Ladbroke Grove, where they staged their first soundclash with Shaka on New Year’s Eve, 1975. “Your chest vibrated and your trouser leg too – we shook the place apart!” says Bovell.“I mean, the building is no longer there, the structural engineers said it had shifted its base. I had a residency there every Friday night, so it was probably mostly me!”
Sufferah’s were also at Metro in the early days of the Notting Hill Carnival. “I watched that thing grow from 60 people at most to what it is now,” says Bovell. Founded in 1959 by a Trinidadian, Claudia Jones, in response to racial attacks the previous year, Carnival now attracts some two million revellers and tourists every August bank holiday weekend. Jones was an active communist who established The West Indian Gazette newspaper for London’s Caribbean communities. It ran local and global stories, supported black businesses, campaigned on issues like apartheid and discussed the growing influence of Rastafari in Jamaica. For its pains, the Gazette saw its office attacked and smeared with feces.
In the ’70s, police in London revived the 1824 Vagrancy Act. The ‘sus’ (‘suspicion’) laws, as they became known, meant anyone could be arrested merely for looking like they were about to commit a crime. These new powers became synonymous with a targeting of black and other minority communities. Paul Gilroy, the academic theorist behind the book The Black Atlantic, notes that “the police were trying to control where people could be in a city. The laws were applied in a very uneven and discretionary way to criminalise a generation, to confine them to some areas of the city and exclude them from others.”
The militant mood found its reflection in the music. Junior Byles’ “Beat Down Babylon” was just one of a series of strident reggae songs, including Culture’s “Two Sevens Clash” and Max Romeo’s “War Ina Babylon” that formed what Gilroy calls “the golden age of militant reggae,” which climaxed in 1976 when riots erupted at the Notting Hill Carnival. Gilroy recalls a summer of tension leading up to the riots, fuelled by blazing heat, anti-apartheid riots in Soweto and the West Indies cricket team’s “boisterous” defeat of England. He describes a new tension in the environment at Carnival, with soundsystems dominating over more traditional carnival acts, like tin pan bands.
In 1976, Bovell was released from prison following a lengthy legal battle stemming from a fight in a club. That year, he drove to Carnival in a white Jaguar with the Jamaican deejay I-Roy and was hit by a hail of bottles. Instantly, he turned the car around and drove away, determined to avoid any repeat. Babylon, a film loosely based on Bovell’s experience, was released in 1981 and sums up many of the recurring themes of soundsystem culture. Centring on Blue, played by Aswad’s Brinsley Forde, it climaxed at a Jah Shaka soundclash, with Blue singing “Can’t Take No More a Dat” over the instrumental of Aswad’s “Warrior Charge.” With its brash horns and steppa rhythms, the track found acclaim in Jamaica, one of the first UK reggae tunes to do so. Within a few years, this became, if not the norm, then a lot less of a rarity.
Around this same time, another crew, Saxon Sound, were also on the up. Their frontman, Tippa Irie was, like Bovell before him, the son of a soundman. Catching the attention of Ned Francis and Dennis Rowe, he was asked to join their soundsystem, Saxon, extending a roster that already included Peter King, Smiley Culture, Maxi Priest and Papa Levi. In 1984, Levi’s “Mi God Mi King” went to number one in the Jamaican charts, the first British reggae record to do so. Its “fast chat” style was taken up both in Jamaica and in the UK, where it became dominant. British reggae was growing fast: Smiley Culture had two UK hits that year, including the Jamaican/ London slang glossary “Cockney Translation.”
Tippa explains the emergence of fast chat: “I think it was a dance in Brockley, and Peter King started to chat – he sped it up, the place went mad. Everybody said, ‘That’s new, that’s fresh.’ The DJs from Jamaica were more laidback, we decided this could be our style.”
Saxon were massive in the ’80s. Tippa says: “We turned it around so that people in the Caribbean started to follow what was happening here. That had never been done before. It was a special time to see a lot of the famous artists from Jamaica chatting our lyrics. I’d go to shows like Reggae Sunsplash and see Yellowman actually singing our songs. That was a thrill.”
In the ’80s, many young artists came up influenced by the likes of Bovell, Shaka and Saxon. Finally, a generation after they began, British systems were forging their own styles.

---

Title: Key Tracks: Les Adams on the K&T remix of Maurice’s “This Is Acid”
Author: Phil Moffa
Date: 2014-07-07
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2014/07/key-tracks-les-adams-on-this-is-acid

Key Tracks: Les Adams on the K&T remix of Maurice’s “This Is Acid”
The UK architect behind the famous Chicago house remix reveals how it was made.
There are some instances where a remix becomes the best known version of a song. Case-in-point: The 1988 K&T remix of Maurice’s “This Is Acid.” The original mix was barely noticed around the time of its creation, while the blue and pink labels with the Vendetta Records zipper logo are unmistakable. The man behind these versions was UK DMC DJ Les Adams, who also often produced and remixed under the L.A. Mix moniker. He worked with many major labels and emerging dance music artists, beginning in 1985 with a remix of The Brothers Johnson’s “Stomp” which led to working with artists like Aretha Franklin and Inner City. Adams was born and raised in Worcester Park, Surrey. Many years and productions later, he has returned – a mile from his original home. Instead of producing/remixing from his home studio, he now runs a radio show, Les Adams’ Dancefloor Classics.
Did you grow up playing music and DJing? How did you start producing electronic music? What got you into it?
Music was a huge part of growing up for me. Even at school I was the child responsible for putting on the records at morning assembly. As a young boy I listened to the ’60s offshore pirate radio ships. My favourite was Radio London, “Big L” as it was known. Along with Radio Caroline and others of its type, in three short years they changed radio in the UK forever. As a kid I was into the pop music of the day: The Beatles, The Who, The Rolling Stones, etc. and the pirate stations were the only place to hear that music. I remember I cried when Radio London was eventually closed down by the government. I was 12 years old.
The local kids used to come around and stand outside the house and dance in the street. Sometimes they would even come and knock to ask me what song I was playing.
My background is DJing. From my early teens I ran a mobile disco with my older brother. We played at weddings, youth clubs and parties. My day job was working in a hi-fi store which was my introduction to high quality audio and that is my second passion after music, quality audio. In my teens while most kids were out exploring pubs, clubs, and girls, I was at home listening to music. By the age of 19 I had a home hi-fi with a top of the range Thorens TD125 turntable, SME arm, a Quad Amplifier and JBL L100 loudspeakers. I used to play this system very loud which made me unpopular with the neighbours but the local kids used to come around and stand outside the house and dance in the street. Sometimes they would even come and knock on my Mum’s door to ask me what song I was playing!
In 1979 I got a job as a DJ in a West End nightclub and that is where I met a guy who changed my life. His name was Greg James and he was an American DJ who had worked with the legendary DJ Richie Kaczor at Studio 54 in New York. Greg taught me to mix records by beat matching. He also explained how to count beats and bars and how to apply this to mixing songs together. I bought my own pair of turntables, they were Technics SL120’s as the SL1200 hadn’t been invented yet, but I had SME hi-fi arms fitted to them to get the best sound I could. I also bought a GLI 3990 mixer which was the first to have both rotary channel faders and a sliding cross-fader.
In 1983 I sent one of my mixes to Tony Prince who was a DJ on radio Luxembourg. He was just starting an organization called The Disco Mix Club (DMC) and was looking for DJ’s who could mix. DMC was a DJ-only subscription service that distributed mixes to club and radio DJ’s throughout the world. Tony loved my mix and took me on the team. Throughout the ’80s my reputation for producing these mixes spread and soon record companies were asking me to produce these mixes, or “megamixes” as they became known for commercial release. I had hundreds of my mixes released both by DMC and record companies and the list of artists I mixed included Cameo, Kool & The Gang, Tina Turner, Steve Arrington of Slave, Aretha Franklin and dozens more.
Suddenly I went from being a DJ with a sampler, a cheap keyboard and a girlfriend with basic keyboard skills to hit record producer. It was quite surreal.
I always had a studio at home where I created these mixes and in 1986 Akai introduced the S900 sampler. This was the piece of kit that was going to take me into production and up to another level. I also bought a Yamaha DX100 MIDI keyboard and a Yamaha QX5 MIDI sequencer. When I got this gear home I sat with the instruction manual trying to figure it out. My girlfriend at the time was Emma Freilich, who had very basic piano skills learned at school, but was still a better player than me! Purely as an experiment and to learn how to use the Akai, we started messing around sampling drum loops and various sounds from other people’s records.
Both Emma and I were fans of the Philly Disco sound and we ended up making our own track entirely from samples and loops just for fun. That weekend my very good friend, the late James Hamilton who was a music journalist and record reviewer, was coming round to co-produce some DJ mixes we were making for Capital Radio in London. I played him our experiment and he was jumping up and down with excitement telling us we should take it to a record company and get it released.
We both laughed and thought it was an insane idea, but James set up a meeting with Mike Sefton who was head of A&M Records’ dance label Breakout. Mike loved it and offered us a record deal. We came up with the band name L.A. Mix and called the song “Don’t Stop (Jammin’).” The record went to number one on the dance charts in the UK and A&M wanted a second single. We made “Check This Out” the same way, full of samples of other people’s music and the record went to number one on the dance chart and number 6 on the national pop chart. Suddenly I went from being a DJ with a sampler, a cheap keyboard and a girlfriend with basic keyboard skills to hit record producer. It was quite surreal. We went on to make two albums for A&M records as L.A. Mix.
How were you approached to do the remix for “This Is Acid”?
I was in Mike Sefton’s office at A&M Records discussing ideas for L.A. Mix and he played me this rather odd track which A&M were thinking about signing from Trax for release in the UK. It was called “This Is Acid” by Maurice, who none of us had heard of. The track was very raw with a 303 bassline and a very monotone spoken vocal. This was right at the start of the whole acid house thing, and in England we really didn’t get it at first. Mike asked me what I thought of it and, to be honest, I really didn’t understand it, although there was something about it I liked. I told Mike I thought the only way this might work is if we completely remixed it. Mike agreed. They gave me a DAT tape of the vocal and that’s all I used. Everything else on the mix was mine.
How was the original version first released? I know there’s a Trax release, but it was much later. Was there an original mix out in 1988?
In early 1988 Trax released the original version but it stiffed, no interest whatsoever in clubs or radio in the United States. A&M, who had done well previously with Mr. Lee tracks in the UK, were looking for “filler” tracks for a compilation album – House Hallucinates – that they were putting together for the UK market and Trax offered them “This Is Acid” on a very cheap deal. That was the point I came in and did the remix. Mike sent my mix to A&M’s sister company Vendetta and they loved it and saw new potential, so A&M UK signed it from Trax for the world and then licensed it to Vendetta for the US. And various companies throughout the world.
Why is the mix called K&T?
Ha, that is really funny and nobody knew why apart from Mike and I. We did two mixes. A harder mix to appeal to the guys and a more “musical” version for the girls. “K&T” stands for Kevin & Trevor, two typical English boy’s names and the other mix called “S&T” stood for Sharon & Tracy!
What studio was the K&T Remix created in? What was the setup?
It was created in my home studio.
RECORDING / MIXING
Studiomaster 24/4 mixer, Tascam MSR16s 16 track open reel, Revox PR99 2-track open reel with External DBX noise reduction, Sony DTC1000es DAT for Mastering.
SYNTHS / MODULES / SAMPLERS
Roland D50, Korg M1, Yamaha Dx100, Yamaha TX802, Yamaha TX81Z, Oberheim Matrix 1000, Akai S1000 & S900 samplers.
DRUMS
Roland TR909, TR626, Alesis HR16. (Plus samples running from the Akais.)
EFFECTS
AMS RMX16 reverb, Ibanez SDR1000 reverb, Yamaha SPX90 mk1, 2 x Lexicon LXP-1 multi effects units, 3 x Drawmer DL221, 2 x Accessit Auto Panners, DBX DDL, BEL BD80 delay, BEL BD80s stereo delay.
MONITORS
JBL L100 Century, Yamaha NS10.
That’s pretty thorough for a home set up. How did you educate yourself on what pieces to get and how did you learn to use all of them?
When I first started to remix records, I used commercial studios which the record company paid for. I worked in some great studios, some of the best in London, but I found myself either rushing a mix or running over time and getting grief for going over budget. It therefore made sense to have my own facility so I did not feel pressured. I like to walk away from a mix after a few hours and go back to it the next day with fresh ears and that just isn’t possible when working under the constraints of budgets.
I worked in some great studios, some of the best in London, but I found myself either rushing a mix or running over time and getting grief for going over budget.
I paid close attention to what equipment the sound engineers used most frequently, watched how they applied them to a mix and which gear gave me the sounds I liked then I went out and bought it. Not only did this give me more flexibility when working, it meant I could charge more for remixes as there was no big budget studio involved. The studio grew way beyond the equipment list here in subsequent years as I added more and more equipment. While I worked in many different studios, there was one particular engineer I liked to use. His name was Pascal Gabriel, he was Belgian and was very good at translating my ideas into reality and always got a great sound. I watched him very closely and I learned a lot about mixing techniques, how to use compression and effects from him. From then on it was a matter of experimentation, twiddling and fiddling till it sounded right to my ears.
How was it sequenced/performed/recorded? Live or in pieces?
The track was programmed and sequenced using Cubase on an Atari ST and synched to the 16 track using SMPTE time code with a Yamaha MSS1 synchronizer. The TR909 and TR626 were triggered with MIDI from Cubase and went direct to the mixer, as were all the drum sound sampled in the two Akais. I didn’t put them to tape so the dynamics of all the percussion could be preserved.
The vocals were sampled into the Akai S1000 then sequenced and recorded to tape along with the synth parts once I decided on the a basic structure, although the final structure was made by doing lots of different passes and mixdowns to 2-track and then edited together, so there never was a multitrack master as such. I did the drum programming and my production partner (and by now wife) Emma Freilich played the keyboard parts. I recorded and mixed the whole thing. Sadly Emma passed away three years ago. On the record label, Mike Stevens is credited for keyboards. What he played was only used on the S&T mix, not the K&T. Emma played all the keys on the K&T.
Do you recall where the fat lead synth sample that starts the song came from?
Yes, that was a sample from a vinyl copy of Todd Terry’s “A Day in the Life” by Black Riot and the rhythm synth for the verse sections was a sample from Kevin Saunderson’s “Big Fun” by Inner City. The sirens were also sampled from some of Todd’s records and the “sexual screams” were some samples I had in my library, I don’t remember where I got those.
That’s very interesting, since those songs themselves are built from samples. Was sampling ever a legal concern or did you just go for it?
At first we just took the risk and sampled anything we wanted. Sampling from the likes of Todd and Kevin was pretty safe because as you say, they had sampled those sounds from somebody else so who owned them was not clear. We also used composite samples we made from several different places and combined them. It got trickier as time went by, but that didn’t really happen till these underground records started to crossover and hit the charts. That’s when the lawyers got involved.
Music publishers and copyright owners actively searched all the tracks that made the charts for anything they could claim was theirs and sue for breach of copyright. The first record I made, “Don’t Stop Jamming,” was full of samples, none of which we had permission to use, but the only thing that got us into trouble was the bassline which we unashamedly copied from the Philly classic “Love Is The Message.” Vincent Montana who wrote that song tried to take out an injunction against us, but we settled out of court by offering him some remixes on his records at a reduced rate!
We also ran into trouble with a vocal sample I used on “Check This Out” which was a much bigger hit in the UK. We sampled a short vocal from “You Don’t Know” by Serious Intention which was owned by the New York record label Easy Street. It turned out that the guy who owned that company was also one of the top music business lawyers in New York, so probably not the ideal person to steal from! Again we settled out of court, I think we paid him around $15,000, but we made a whole lot more than that out of our record so we came out smiling.
What was the response to the remix of “This Is Acid” versus the original?
Incredible. Every DJ in America was on it like a rash. Maurice very graciously states in his biography that my mix put him on the map and thanked me personally by telephone some years later.
Any memorable moments of the first times you heard it clubs and the reaction?
Yes, I visited New York just after the record blew up there and while I was in The Sound Factory the DJ dropped it and the place went crazy. I believe it was played for a very long time after that too.
What projects have you been working on lately?
I no longer remix or produce music. I ran out of talent for doing that years ago! Nowadays I own and run a radio production studio from my home and present two music radio shows playing ’70s and ’80s jazz, funk and soul music on Solar Radio CH0129 on Sky Digital throughout the UK and Europe. There are podcasts of both shows available on iTunes if you search for Les Adams Dancefloor Classics.
My studio website is www.OnAirExperience.co.uk and I manage several radio presenters whose shows I produce and place on various radio stations in the UK and in Europe. I also help get people into radio by signing them to my production company, then coach and produce them.
You say you lost the talent to remix and produce but you still produce people you sign to your production company. What’s the difference?
Ok, I ran out of talent for making music, the ideas dried up and it stopped becoming fun, it just felt like a job. What I do now is produce radio shows which is completely different. My job now is to select music to play, think of ideas and features for the shows, assist and guide the presenter, check scripts. And then there’s the technical side, which is my passion: Operating the studio, checking levels to ensure a good sound for the broadcast.
My current studio is a high quality radio broadcast facility that combines state-of-the art digital technology with classic analogue gear. The desk is a Denon 96k 24 bit digital and all the mastering and editing is 48k 24 bit, but the stereo processing is ’90s technology BSS analogue, because it just sounds better! I still have the Neumann U 87 Ai as you can see in the picture, and that is fed through a Focusrite Dual ISA preamp, BSS and Aphex processing. We also have turntables, DAT, Minidisc and even a cassette deck for those who have vinyl records or old tapes they need to play or dub.

---

Title: Gallery: Storm Rave
Author: Drew Gurian; Maria Jose Govea
Date: 2015-05-17
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/05/gallery-storm-rave/

Gallery: Storm Rave
Brooklyn’s recent wave of noisy, abrasive techno owes a massive debt to Frankie Bones, who began throwing massive underground parties in the borough before many of today’s young producers were even born. In the early ‘90s, Bones effectively brought rave culture to New York with Storm Rave, a series of wild warehouse events that played host to thousands of attendees – not to mention a steady stream of world-class DJs – while educating an entire generation about a new way to party. Soundtracked by hard, punishing techno and often taking place in suffocatingly cramped and disorienting spaces, these clandestine all-night affairs only lasted for a few years, yet they left an indelible mark on New York City nightlife.
22 years after the last Storm Rave, we were proud to help bring the event back. True to the spirit of the original series, as part of the Red Bull Music Academy Festival New York 2015 we took over an undisclosed warehouse location in Brooklyn with Bones and an elite crew of fellow New York techno pioneers: Adam X, Heather Heart, Lenny Dee, and Rob Gee.

---

Title: Acid Jazz: A photo essay
Date: 2015-07-28
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/07/acid-jazz-photo-essay/

Dingwalls is celebrated for a reason: Gilles Peterson and Patrick Forge pushed music both funky and stylish, opening the doors to a new style called Acid Jazz. In this photo series, we take a look inside the vibrant scene of parties taking place in London at the time

---

Title: Honey Soundsystem: Five Parties
Author: Aaron Gonsher
Date: 2016-06-02
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/06/honey-soundsystem-five-parties/

Honey Soundsystem: Five Parties
The San Francisco party crew run down their five most important parties to date with Aaron Gonsher
When Honey Soundsystem launched in San Francisco in 2007, they faced the same sort of problems that bedevil party promoters around the world. Who do we book that best reflects our musical ethos, and that we can afford? What do we do if not enough people show up? How can we avoid being shut down by the police? Honey Soundsystem, though, was also trying to answer one question that overshadowed the typical concerns: How can we concentrate on queer-focused projects to create a time machine for dancefloors?
In the years since, Honey Soundsystem has earned a reputation as one of the most respected parties in the United States – no “queer” qualifier necessary. Founded by Jacob Sperber and Ken Woodard, and now consisting of Sperber, Josh Cheon, Jason Kendig and Robert Yang, the quartet have sustained a high-minded historical approach to their events without sacrificing hedonism, by sharing stories they care about in unique musical and visual ways.
“So many of us moved here [San Francisco] to either escape our cities, which were maybe more oppressive, or just have a new start,” says Cheon. “Whatever the reasons, we all moved here. I think what we wanted to do was highlight some of the important pieces of literature and the lineage of the queer dancefloor.”
Sperber, Cheon, Kendig and Yang all moved in concentric circles in San Francisco even before Honey Soundsystem became the common center. Sperber and Yang met for the first time at a party called Playboy during Yang’s DJ set, when Sperber stormed the stage for a track ID and introduction after hearing Yang play Laurie Marshall’s “Disco Spaceship.” Cheon, a former intern for New York’s DFA Records, met Yang after attending a party at Gun Club and running into him the following week at Dolores Park. Sperber later showed up at one of Yang’s final Bailando events, and from there the group went to a 4/20 party, the weed-celebrating, unofficial public holiday in San Francisco.
“Jason Kendig was DJing, and Jacob was basically going around with pot brownies giving them to party people,” remembers Yang. They all ended up falling deep into conversation, not knowing at the time that the collective they discussed would eventually become Honey Soundsystem. For Sperber, it wasn’t enough to just throw a party, and it’s telling that none of the current members refer to Honey Soundsystem as a party when asked how exactly they define themselves. A community project, yes. A time machine for dancefloors, sure. But “party” feels limiting in describing the conscious celebration of influences that evokes their strongest emotions and sense of pride.
“One of the things that brought us all together is an archivist, historian sensibility,” says Sperber. “We’re trying to infuse that into every dancefloor, every party, every project.” “We have a shared love for fun spaces, amazing ambience and exceptional musical programming,” adds Yang. “What we try and do is create an environment that just transcends what you would normally see at a regular club, or gay club – or any place that you might take for granted.”
Still, music remains a key unifying factor and guide. Looking back, Jason Kendig remembers that “With Honey, we were trying to give ourselves a platform to play music that we were excited about that was not being heard elsewhere.” Having traveled from humble beginnings to all-night takeovers of some of the most esteemed clubs in the world, this is the story of Honey Soundsystem in five parties.
Todd Terje @ Club Rawhide - August 26th, 2007
“To be honest, all of the first parties kind of sucked,” says Sperber now. “Everyone was really skeptical whether or not we should be doing this idea. At the same time, there was such a vibrant scene of people from all walks of life who were just excited to be owning a little piece of town. All our friends were throwing all the parties at all the bars. There was a reason to go out every night.”
July 15th 2007 was the debut of Tea With Honey, a party at the Transfer featuring Sperber as P-Play, Ken Woodard as Kenvulsion, Robert Yang under his Robot Hustle moniker and Gavin Hardkiss headlining. Because of its long legacy in San Francisco, throwing a party at the Transfer was symbolically significant for the Honey collective. Yang remembers Tea With Honey less for musical reasons than for the sense that it was a proving ground for the longterm goals they wanted to accomplish. That opportunity came the following month, when Honey Soundsystem hosted Norwegian DJ Todd Terje for one of his earliest appearances in the United States.
Sperber planned for the party to take place in the Rawhide, a now-defunct country and western bar with an owner who he recalls stinking of liquor. “He had no idea who we were, where we were coming from,” says Sperber. “His conception of gay guys coming in and saying ‘Hey, we want to throw a party here,’ he’s probably thinking 135 BPM Rihanna tracks and a bunch of 22-year-olds with a rack of abs dancing in their underwear. That was definitely not what we brought in there that night.”
Instead, Honey populated the old saloon with drag acts to fill the empty space between their resident DJs and the headliner Terje, a decision that still stands out for its strange results. “I feel like in the early days a lot of the parties were very surreal,” says Yang, remembering the drag acts that filled time at the Rawhide. “There was one really crazy act where our friend Stanley, the Italo disco DJ, he had a little protégé, and they were lipsynching to Chinese opera or something, and they were basically rolling each other up into egg rolls. There was something mentioned where some of the drag performances were slightly racist. It was a little bizarre, but it was all in good fun.”
The sense of accomplishment that accompanied Terje’s appearance at Rawhide buoyed their spirits for what was to come, affirming a mission statement that was still in flux. “That was one of the most wild nights for us,” Sperber says. “I think it was when our community really came out to support an event because they knew we were bringing someone that needed to be met with open arms by San Francisco.”
“That’s when I realized that we were doing something for San Francisco,” Sperber continues. “Our parties were creating an energy to receive people and do the city they visited justice, and the idea that there would be a queer relationship to San Francisco for other queers who were doing stuff with music and wanted to come through.”
Dancer from the Dance - March 23rd, 2008
Honey Soundsystem’s Dancer from the Dance party was trumpeted as “the first ever dancefloor adaptation of a gay novel.” The party resonates not just for its reference material, but because it showcases the depth of historical accuracy and insistence on memory that Honey wants to reference and build upon.
“The book [Dancer from the Dance] was influential and an exciting portal into the past,” says Kendig. “You’re maybe young enough that you don’t have peers that you could talk to about what the disco era was like, from a gay perspective, and here was this novel about someone who was traversing that scene, and somewhat disenchanted with it.” The party itself was held in the basement of 1015 Folsom, a historic San Francisco venue formerly used as a bathhouse. “Here we were in the basement, fog machine on blast, with print-outs of quotes from the novel itself, and curating a soundtrack that was very specific to the night,” Kendig remembers. “We all delved into our disco collections, basically.”
Andrew Holleran’s Dancer from the Dance addresses the emotional depth (or lack thereof) on display in the New York gay scene pre-AIDS, celebrating a culture of vanity and hedonism while exposing the pockets of discontent to be found within a life of casual sex and indiscriminate insufflation. “I think for us, this book was helping create that myth of this far away gay wonderland,” says Sperber of his experience of the novel. On the night, the crew debuted a video piece by Ken Woodard based on VHS recordings he took at raves in the 1990s. The party also coincided with the group’s immersion in Hi-NRG history after coming into the possession of the archives of John Hedges from Megatone Records, moving laterally into the role of disco historians. “The space just oozes these ghosts of cool history, themes from the book,” says Sperber of 1015 Folsom.
“There’s an amazing quote from the book where supposedly someone dies from trying to sniff a popper at the bottom of a pool in Fire Island,” adds Sperber. “I created this giant visual representation of that.”
“Throughout the book they mention all the disco songs and moments and soul music that was setting the dancefloor on fire,” remembers Josh Cheon. “For my set at the party, I went through the book, highlighted all the disco songs, and I went out and the ones I didn’t have I bought them all. Some of them were pretty rare. I remember playing the entire set just using every song that the author mentioned in that book.”
Their tribute to Dancer from the Dance is “probably the most pretentious party we’ve ever thrown,” says Sperber. “The idea that the entire event was geared towards, ‘If you don’t know what this book is then you’re out of the loop. If you want to know, maybe you should read the CliffsNotes before you show up and just try to get laid at this dance party.”
House Of Black Leather - September 26th, 2010
Folsom Street Fair is touted as “The World’s Biggest Leather Event,” drawing 400,000 fans, participants and voyeurs alike, to the streets of San Francisco every year. It was in this setting that Honey Soundsystem put on House of Black Leather, the first time they participated in the party schedule that dominates the weekend. Folsom is a San Francisco institution, but at the time Honey’s musical philosophy set them apart from the standard programming available during the fair. They prepared accordingly, ready to show a different side of Honey’s aesthetic to newcomers.
“Jacob did this promo video, which was an homage to underground queer filmmaker Kenneth Anger,” says Yang. “It was a very seedy, deviant-type of promo where it just all featured socks, dirty socks, boots, popper bottles and fetish gear. It was a draw for a lot of newcomers who had never experienced Honey, because we’re showing it in a new light.”
The result was a quite non-traditional Folsom event. Though musically opposite to what would normally be on offer, the party was nonetheless a huge success, drawing a big crowd and entrenching the Honey crew’s position in the fiefdom of Folsom.
“I think the success of it perhaps made Folsom realize that it would make sense to – not change their direction completely, but be like, ‘Okay, we’re not addressing this other swath of people that are actually interested in doing something that just aren’t into what we’re doing,’” remembers Kendig. House of Black Leather was a validation that Honey Soundsystem’s style of party could be just as enticing to mainstream gay crowds as the scenes they had initially established themselves in opposition to.
Deviants - September 21st, 2014
Following the success of the first House of Black Leather, it was only natural that Honey Soundsystem would continue collaborating with Folsom. “The guys who organized Folsom were so impressed and excited by the energy and the music that they kind of pulled us, and the following year our party Deviants was the official afterparty for the Folsom Street Fair,” says Cheon – not a bad gig in terms of being able to transmit the local philosophy of Honey to a global audience.
A specific Deviants highlight, though, was the 2014 appearance of Paul Parker, a former collaborator of Patrick Cowley on tracks like “Right on Target.” It was the first time in 25 years that Parker had performed in San Francisco, and his appearance epitomizes Honey’s goal of transmitting messages from the golden age of disco and beyond to a modern audience, transportive power intact.
“I’m getting emotional,” Cheon says as he starts to describe the feeling of watching Parker perform. “That was so emotional, just watching him up there singing all the Patrick Cowley songs with his perfect voice and perfect body” – a living, breathing relic of the period Honey spends so much energy glorifying and examining.
“Him coming on stage and doing some of his classics was pretty exciting,” agrees Kendig. “There’s a fan boy inside of me that was just thrilled to get to interact with someone like him.” Soon after the party, Parker unearthed cassette tapes from his archive, and they were eventually released as The Thief of Love on Honey Soundsystem Records. Also appearing on that year’s Deviants lineup was Marea Stamper AKA Black Madonna, then a resident and main booker at Chicago’s Smart Bar, and someone who would be instrumental to one of Honey’s next big projects.
Generators - February 7th, 2015
Generators represents both a peak of Honey Soundsystem’s extended conceptual investment in their events as well as proof of the growing audience for such a mix of education and exhilaration. The crew was initially offered a standard residency at Smart Bar in Chicago by the Black Madonna. Instead, they conceived a year-long project of six parties that would combine immersive visual installations with pre-recorded stories reflecting different chapters of queer house culture, both in the Midwest and otherwise. They enlisted producers, writers and performers to contribute to the project, bringing together multiple generations to tell a story accessible to a wide range of listeners. Part history lesson, part paean to pagan ritual, part celebration, Generators was a success before the dancefloor even opened on the night of the first party.
“Generators was the first time we did a year-long project based around some of these things we’d been working around for a long time,” says Sperber. “This idea of bringing historical context and maybe some media that you could experience or have to read somewhere else, and then try to experience it in a club. Generators was, I think, the most successful version of that, just because we learned over time how not to force it. The idea that, create an experience in the club that is organic as possible, and actually everything you want to get communicated will get communicated, because people aren’t being forced into something.”
At Smart Bar, they covered nearly every surface with artwork, photos and more. “We had a kind of séance moment of lighting incense and playing all these songs to invoke the dancefloors of the past,” relates Cheon. “There were so many people there and the response was really great – the audio pieces that went with each party were very important and told part of a deeper story that maybe you didn’t get from the soundtrack we were playing.”
“In some capacity it could have just been us showing up and playing sets,” says Kendig, “but Jacob, ever the conceptualist, was really interested in trying to make it even more personal and have more depth to it – I think the locals that were coming through were impressed with the level of work that was trying to be maintained.”
“Generators is a celebration, but also a history lesson for everyone involved, as well as the audience, on the timeline of queer music spaces,” adds Yang. “We really wanted to absorb everything and just get really deep with what it means to play a gay event in Chicago. We are trying to figure out how to present history, but we also go into a storytelling mode, where we’re trying to tell the story of queer spaces through the lens of some writers who have their experiences, as well. We wanted to feature that as part of the continuum of queer dance culture.”
Honey Soundsystem appears every fourth Tuesday of the month on RBMA Radio.

---

Title: Adam X Goes Down The Wormhole
Author: Shawn Reynaldo
Date: 2016-08-04
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/08/traversable-wormhole-interview/

Adam X Goes Down The Wormhole
The New York-born, Berlin-based industrial techno figurehead details his Traversable Wormhole project
Back in 2009, a mysterious series of white labels took the techno world by storm, marked only with a stamp and the name Traversable Wormhole. Following months of speculation, it ultimately came to light that Brooklyn rave legend and Sonic Groove label boss Adam X was behind the project. Traversable Wormhole wasn’t in line with the industrial techno he was known for, yet the music clearly struck a chord and still stands as one of his most successful endeavors to date. Now, after several years of focusing on his work as Adam X and ADMX-71, he’s decided to revisit Traversable Wormhole for a new record on Vatican Shadow’s Hospital Productions label. In this excerpt from his interview with Shawn Reynaldo on RBMA Radio’s First Floor, they discuss the Traversable Wormhole project in depth.
Listen to First Floor on RBMA Radio here every Thursday at 1 PM EDT.
Why did you start the Traversable Wormhole project?
When I moved to Berlin, techno wasn’t really popular yet. The minimal, more tech-house thing was really big, but there weren’t many parties playing harder techno. In Berghain you had Marcel Dettmann, Ben Klock and Marcel Fengler who were playing proper techno, but they were actually playing a lot of older stuff because there wasn’t so much new music out at this time [suitable] for what they were playing. I thought that what I was doing under Adam X was probably too industrial at the time for the club – too EBM – and I wanted to do something that I think they would play there.
I had roots, of course, in the techno scene for years. Back in the ’90s, I was playing trippier acid techno at after-hours parties – but then here I am, in Berghain. I hadn’t been in a club like that in years. When I first moved over we didn’t have anything like that in the States, and normally if I got booked in Europe I was playing prime-time slots. I was never in venues at this time in the morning, so I wanted to make some music that I thought would fit with what they would play. I figured that if I put it out under Adam X the music would probably get overlooked – or, if you go to do something new, people are like, “What the hell is he doing now?” and you lose a fanbase.
I saw a record in Rubadub in Scotland at the time, because I had a residency there, and there was a white label record called Seldom Felt that caught my attention. I was like, “That’s cool. I haven’t seen a white label with stamps since the ’90s.” That gave me the idea to do this white label thing. When I had enough tracks that I thought would capture some attention, I decided to put out at least three releases in a row in a two-month period. There wasn’t a lot of noise on the first one, but it started to really pick up on the second and then it blew up [with the third release]. That was the start of the project.
I was asked by my friend Finn that works at Hardwax, who was writing for Resident Advisor at the time, to do this feature called Playing Favorites. I knew I wanted to announce to the people that this Traversable Wormhole thing was me, I felt like the time was right, but I wanted to do it subtly. If the people read the feature, it’s not in a grand announcement. If they catch it, they pick up on it. That’s how we did it.
One of the bookers from Berghain hit me up on my Traversable Wormhole MySpace and asked me where they could book me, but I’m friends with the booker and they didn’t know it was me. I played it off and pushed them to a booking agent, but then they actually confirmed the booking. I had never played Berghain before. Later, I said to my friend, “I heard you booked Traversable Wormhole.” He’s like, “How do you know that?” I was like, “Well, it’s actually me.” His face dropped. It was perfect. It was exactly how I wanted to plan it.
How big is the role of science and science fiction in the project? The name Traversable Wormhole is a quantum physics term, I believe.
I’m into astronomy, physics and all this stuff – techno has always had that to me. It’s sci-fi music. I was reading about wormholes and I saw the name. I said, “What the hell is a traversable wormhole?” I’d never heard of something like this. I was like, “This is sick, this name is amazing.”
The last Traversable Wormhole record came out five years ago. Why resurrect the project now?
You know what it was? I got a little bit bored of getting booked to play live all the time. I was getting booked to play at Dutch festivals at peak time and I didn’t make this music for those kinds of venues. I really wanted to DJ more as Adam X, and I felt that there’s always been some of Traversable Wormhole in Adam X anyway – or even in ADMX-71.
I also wanted to do more industrial-based, slower stuff. One of the tracks was actually a sketch that I did years ago and then later reworked: the B-side track, “Semiclassical Gravity.” I felt it was the right time in between releases: I had the ADMX album last year on L.I.E.S, I’d done the Adam X album on Sonic Groove the year before, so I thought it was the right time to fit this in.
Can we expect more Traversable Wormhole music in the future?
As I’ve always said with a project, I never reveal what I’m going to do in the future with it. I think the project started out with mystique and I’d rather keep it that way because mystique is fun. That’s missing a lot in techno these days.

---

Title: An Oral History of the Sydney Rave Scene, 1989-1994
Author: Jim Poe
Date: 2016-08-31
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/08/sydney-rave-scene-1989-1994-oral-history/

An Oral History of the Sydney Rave Scene, 1989-1994
Two-toned flyers with party names like Flim Flam, Pie ’n’ Mash and All in the Bubble of Yum. 0055 numbers. Massive soundsystems pumping Balearic beat and Belgian techno. Hundreds of baggy-jeans clad revellers going mental in dodgy warehouses in Alexandria or underground carparks in the CBD.
If you lived through those times in Sydney – or in similar manifestations elsewhere during the same era – the mere mention of these things is likely to make your palms sweat and your eyes glaze over with fond, if fuzzy, memories. If you didn’t, no doubt you’ve heard wistful tales from your salt-and-pepper-haired rave elders.
For those who were there and those who weren’t, we’ve compiled an oral history of the beginnings of the Sydney rave scene, gathered together from interviews with four of the key DJs and promoters – Sugar Ray, Ming D, Abel and Phil Smart – along with a number of punters whose lives were changed between the walls of those dirty warehouses.
What becomes clear from these interviews is how singular the Sydney scene was at the dawn of this movement. The massive Hordern Pavilion and RAT parties, the thriving LGBT underground and, of course, the famous laid-back lifestyle all combined to make Sydney a prime party destination for hedonistic travellers in the late ’80s. When a wave of UK expats brought a new dance groove – and new recreational drugs – into this lively landscape, it triggered a musical and cultural explosion, harnessing this energy into a rave scene that was uniquely creative, spirited and rich despite its small size and relative isolation.
As this epoch – the start of which is now more than a quarter of a century ago – recedes into the hazy past of another millennium, it’s standard to focus on the sometimes stark differences between then and now. The analogue technology; the cheaply printed flyers; the sometimes silly fashion – it’s tempting to view it as a primitive time, and perhaps in some ways it was. Yet these stories also make clear that this scene was forward-thinking from its very beginnings: multicultural, technologically adventurous, futurist, musically eclectic and international in focus.
It’s also easy to conflate those early years with the later excesses of happy hardcore and kiddie raves in football stadiums. But one recurring theme in this narrative is that there was a sharp dividing line in the mid-’90s between the raw DIY warehouse raves dominated by English expats, and the later Australian rave scene, which was younger, more popular and marked by harder and faster music. Yet the smaller expat party scene paved the way for the bigger Australian scene, and thus helped make possible the Australian dance music industry as we know it today.
Sugar Ray
One of the Cartel of pioneering rave DJs, founder of Love and Reachin’ Records
SETTING THE SCENE
Sugar Ray
I started DJing in, like, ’89. My family had emigrated to Australia in the late ’80s from England... And I started going to clubs, predominantly gay clubs, in Sydney, like the Exchange and Patchs. They were the only places that were playing cool music, electronic underground kind of music. And the first house music was starting to break through then, and Sydney was having these massive Hordern [Pavilion] parties.
Phil Smart
One of the second generation of Aussie rave DJs alongside Abel
Phil Smart
I grew up in the suburbs on punk and indie music. But then I discovered clubs, electronic music and dancing and I just liked that more. So I kind of followed this path. None of my friends were into it.
Ming D
Sydney-born DJ and only Australian member of the original Cartel
Ming D
What you heard on the radio growing up [in Australia] was basically just crappy pub rock... And then all of a sudden there were touches of new wave, New Romantic, some synth stuff starting to trickle through. In like ’85, ’86, [a friend] started to introduce me to hip-hop through tapes. The hip-hop culture was starting to trickle down here, through Wild Style and Beat Street and all those movies. And I think because Australia had a mixed population – it wasn’t just white people here, so to speak – a lot of the Islanders and people out west started to identify with hip-hop music. So I got into that, and then I started to DJ in the hip-hop scene. Then I got a job in a record shop called Disco City, and that got me access to all this music.
Phil Smart
I started [DJing] in 1987, but it wasn’t for a year or two, maybe ’89, that I started to play in the city – and firstly at this place called The Front, which was an infamous afterhours club. And I was green as. The thing about that place – it was the afterhours club at the heyday of the Hordern Pavilion parties. So I got dropped into this thing. I didn’t really know much, and I didn’t know many people, so that was my kind of initiation, properly, into club culture.
Ming D
On the weekends I used to borrow the speakers [from Disco City], steal my dad’s van, and we used to do backyard parties around the place. I had a bit of a following from these backyard parties – I was 16, 17 – and there I could play hip-hop, electro and new wave records. And then house started to filter through, and I thought, “Wow, this is awesome.” So then I started to mix it all up, and Australia sort of being [made up of different] groups of people, you could be a bit eclectic, you could play different styles, and everyone was into that new sound... You couldn’t dance to rock music – you’d shake your head, drink beer and hopefully not get into a fight. All of a sudden you got this music which is designed for dancing and expression.
Abel
Australian pioneer of breakbeats and big beat
Abel
I became a DJ at the beginning of the rave scene, but I was a punter before that. And that was the late ’80s, which was at the Hordern Pavilion.
THE BIRTH OF RAVE
Ming D
Sydney was quite hedonistic. This is, I guess, 1987, 1988. Sydney always had a big gay population from day one, and of course you know the ecstasy was knocking around then. It was legal – it wasn’t illegal then. The gay scene had a good community, they had good music, and their DJs were tapping into what was happening over in the States with the house scene, the jack scene, the acid scene.
Abel
Before the rave scene, it was dance parties. It was a mixture of gay, straight, punk, gothic – it was everything – and each weekend, 5,000 people would get together and dance all night at the Hordern Pavilion. And in the late ’80s, that’s when the rest of the world was looking at Australia as a party destination. Because we had the Hordern Pavilion and the RHI [the Royal Hall of Industries], which could hold so many people in the one place at the one time. It was quite unique.
Phil Smart
Sydney already had this massive [scene]... 10,000-people parties happening. It was famous the world over for these – for the RAT parties and Sweatbox and whatever.
Ming D
And that brought together not only the gay scene, but it brought together people in the underground electronic scene... Just for the production and the spectacle and the emotions. And that attracted the English crew, who were coming out of the Summer of Love.
Abel
[The Hordern] was a bit of everything. It was a bit ravey, it was a bit disco, it was a bit house and it was very acid house. It was a real mishmash and it was just so wonderful because everybody got on.
Phil Smart
The gay culture in Sydney [was] really influential... There were so many mixed clubs, where it just didn’t matter, gay, straight or whatever. And then, time goes on... They fracture and split apart. And now, these days, mixing the gay and rave, gay and straight scenes is not that common anymore.
Sugar Ray
Within the gay scene, ecstasy was popular. But within the straight community, ecstasy was still very much underground, and the music was very underground. They weren’t playing those kinds of rave records at the big gay parties in the gay scene then, so the only place you could hear that stuff – you know, all the early Detroit stuff and all the early Kickin stuff, all the early English stuff – was at these predominantly English rave parties.
A lot of Australians had never had that experience, basically going from pub rock to the bombardment of these sounds through big speakers.
Phil Smart
So as that was coming down, that’s when the rave scene kind of took over.
Degrassi (punter)
The City of Sydney really started cracking down on the Hordern parties in about 1990.
Abel
There was a period in the very late ’80s, early ’90s, when both things were happening at the same time – you had your Hordern Pavilion parties and you had your little underground warehouse parties. And I guess more people started raving when the Hordern was closed down around ’91, because of local residents complaining... And then that’s when party people looked for somewhere else.
Phil Smart
There was the Hordern scene and the Sydney club scene in the late ’80s, and then the rave scene starts… There was this transition that it went through. When I was at The Front I would hear people starting to talk disparagingly about the English raves – “They’re coming here and they’re taking over and they’re doing these parties” and whatever – and they were dissing it. But my ears pricked up and I was like, “Wow, that sounds really interesting.” So I searched it out. The first ones I think were in late ’89.
Sugar Ray
In 1990 I did two Love parties – that was the first kind of [rave in Sydney], in this film studio in Redfern, with another guy actually, named Rob Milton. He’d come over here from London where he’d been doing these parties called Dirtbox, which were quite legendary. And he kind of took me under his wing and passed on his musical knowledge, and so he and I did the first two Love parties. And then I packed up my record boxes and flew off to LA and London with the intention of just going to see what was happening over there. And when I got to England the whole rave thing had just kind of come to an end. Thatcher and the police had managed to sort of completely close it down. But it was still an amazing time – the record shops, and the music that was coming out, and the buzz and everything. A year later I came back to Sydney, and there were all these people – that couldn’t rave in Britain anymore, I guess – who had gone travelling and ended up through Thailand and Asia and made their way down to Sydney. All of a sudden you had all these expats – English, Scottish, Irish people, all arrived in Sydney.
Phil Smart
It ended up being very influenced by Goa and Ko Pha Ngan as well, because a lot of them were coming through the Asia trail. They’d leave England and they’d go to India for a while, they’d go through Southeast Asia, full-moon parties in Ko Pha Ngan. And they would end up in Sydney to do their two-year visa. There were a lot of people doing this trail, so that’s why it definitely flavoured the whole beginning of the scene here.
Ming D
It was the ecstasy trail... They had this circuit where they would bring the ecstasy and the acid from the Summer of Love... Everyone sort of dropped out, and even from the ’70s, set up their own little utopia culture. So they were doing the circuits. There’d be these wild cats coming from England, India, the Dutch were coming through with their techno. And Australia was a place to come – they’d heard about it – to hear the music, to go to the big parties, and to spread the Summer of Love and do business.
Phil Smart
It still spins me out how influential the English were in so many of these places, like in California there was a big English influence. I find that really interesting.
Sugar Ray
And this whole rave scene, it just kicked off... And I just jumped straight back in.
Ming D
There were a lot of good underground clubs knocking around Sydney, and Oxford Street was wild. There was no property development, so we had warehouse parties, we had underground clubs that went all day, all night. The music was at its peak, and Sydney was a happening place. Very happening.
THE CARTEL
Phil Smart
The English rave scene just started right under everyone’s noses. And it took a while for it to be infiltrated by Aussies. When I started going there were only a few Aussies.
Sugar Ray
The Australians, they hadn’t realised – they didn’t know it was going on.
Abel
It was 80% expats, 20% locals, all together in a dusty warehouse. And I remember a lot of the locals would start learning a lot of the English lingo like “bollocks” and “nutter,” and everybody was on the same vibe.
Phil Smart
Most of my friends were English for a good long time there – that’s why I still have a lot of English words in my vocabulary and I can easily, you know, lapse into a bit of an English twang. Because that was my world for a few years.
Ming D
They called it the Cartel. The big DJs were Sugar Ray, Robin Knight, Joe 90, myself and Sheen. That was the big five. Sheen was British, Joe 90 was British, Robin Knight was British, Sugar Ray is British. I’m the Aussie.
Phil Smart
They were the five who dominated the music and DJing in those early years.
Sugar Ray
I’d play for Sheen, Sheen would play for me, I’d play for Robin and Joe, so we would just all end up playing for each other. We all got on really well, we were all real good friends, I’d say.
Abel
There weren’t many DJs back then, you know? Now everyone’s a DJ. [laughs] But back then there was only a handful.
Ming D
I was part of the Cartel. Flim Flam were the big [parties]. [Sugar] Ray was doing Love parties, they were big ones. Robin Knight was doing the Light parties. There were five or six main parties that would go on every month, and we respected each other – “OK, we’ll do it this week, someone else do it the next week.”
DIAL 0055 R-A-V-E
Abel
In those early days, I was a punter. And what drew me towards the rave scene was its mystery. It was like, what is this? You’ve got to ring a 0055 number to find out the venue – it was so underground.
Leo (punter)
You’d have to pick up a cheap photocopied flyer at a record store, then call the 0055 number for directions on the night. They were never advertised in the street press at first... There was definitely that feeling of being part of something quite secret and underground, something that hadn’t existed before. Although clubbing and big Hordern parties had been around for years, the early raves seemed like the start of a new subculture.
Degrassi (punter)
I loved not even knowing where you’d be going until a couple of hours before the party started.
Abel
Because in the early ’90s there was a recession in Sydney, a lot of the warehouses were empty. So you could go to the real-estate agent and say, “Look, I want to put on a party.” And he’d say “Yeah, look, no worries, give us a couple of grand, here are the keys. [laughs] It’s yours for the weekend.”
Sugar Ray
I’d print up all these tickets, put a 0055 number on there, and sell them through record shops. I’d invite the other guys to DJ, and then we’d have like a thousand people turn up at these really mad, crazy parties in the most amazing venues. I think I got a couple of film studios – there was even an art museum that I got once. And the other guys were doing them in underground carparks. You’d just turn up in the middle of Alexandria, before it became all apartments and stuff.
Phil Smart
Back in the day, no one ever went west of the city. You’d be hard pressed to get anyone to actually leave Oxford Street, but the rave scene pushed people out. Alexandria opened up, so that was where a lot of them were, in warehouses in Alexandria. The Inner West wasn’t a thing, really – nothing really happened there. I remember a few parties out in carparks out in the city, just odd little venues.
Sugar Ray
It was really exciting, because you’d get this number and then just turn up at these amazing venues and there’d be a thousand predominantly British people in there with all their baggy jeans and tie-dye T-shirts, and a strobe machine and smoke machine, and just listening to this amazing music that was really sort of exciting and fresh. There’d never been music like it, it was amazing.
Degrassi (punter)
There was a real DIY aspect to it, which put the focus on the music and the gathering of like-minded people.
You’d hear everything from a Tears for Fears track to a Derrick May track to some old whatever it might be. Just a real mixture of music.
Ming D
That was the warehouse scene. You know, “Green lasers – whoa, what’s this?” And we had great production – I saw my first fractal on a bank of TV sets. Some English guy had got hold of 20 TV sets and hooked up fractals on video – it’s like, “What!” So the technology, the music, all of that was cutting-edge, and people basically got their mind blown with the sound. A lot of Australians had never had that experience, basically going from pub rock to the bombardment of these sounds through big speakers.
Degrassi (punter)
The first rave I remember going to was All in the Bubble of Yum in the middle of 1991. What struck me was how completely and utterly unpretentious the whole thing was, and I loved it. People were so welcoming and accepting. Of course, I’m sure the prolific use of pills had a lot to do with that, but it was more than that. At that stage, there were only a few hundred regular ravers around Sydney, so there was a sense of community.
Leo (punter)
The best of those parties that I went to was definitely Sweet Science, held in a warehouse or studio by the water in Balmain. This was early 1991. It was simple, nothing fancy, just one or two lasers and a strobe in a huge dark warehouse, but incredible music all night. This was before rave culture had splintered off into subgroups, so the music was still very eclectic.
MUSIC IS THE ANSWER
Rob (punter)
My sister took me to my first rave when I was 16. Still, to this day, I remember seeing a guy dancing – it was weird because he wasn’t dancing in a circle, but dancing, as far as I could tell, at the speakers, and sort of at the DJ. I watched and watched and listened and realised what he was moving to – which parts of the music moved his feet and his hands and how very in the music he was. It was pretty transformative. It marked a pretty big turning point for me – letting the music in. Letting it move you.
Abel
Back then it was predominantly Balearic – it was a lot of piano, a lot of vocals, very Balearic, and Sheen and myself, we’d sort of try and go a little bit more techno.
Phil Smart
[Ming was] an amazing DJ – really, really talented, really various and crazy, and I always liked it because I liked something a bit weird or different. He was the one who played stuff like Jesus Jones, or he would play Talking Heads, or he would play the fuckin’ Oompa Loompa song, and then drop a beat underneath and then go somewhere else. He was incredible... He would climb up on the DJ booth and just go nuts. He was amazing.
Ming D
Sheen was techno, Robin Knight was Balearic, Joe 90 was a bit funkier. Me, I was a mix between – they put me on in the morning a lot, because [my music] was kind of uplifting.
Abel
There definitely was a flow, everything worked with each other and everybody got a good two-hour bracket.
Degrassi (punter)
Music at a single party could be so incredibly diverse. You could hear a pretty commercial vocal track get mixed into a really underground hardcore track. The music wasn’t homogeneous as it is now.
Sugar Ray
Every DJ had their own different style. But it worked, you know – you put them together over a night, you had this amazing journey, and you’d hear everything from a Tears for Fears track to a Derrick May track to some old whatever it might be. Just a real mixture of music.
Phil Smart
Given our position in Australia, in the world, we were in a unique position to take all these influences from all over the place.
Sugar Ray
It was taking all these influences from around the world and giving it its own spin, and with the Sydney vibe as well. It was unique in the fact that there were these five DJs who would be playing every week at these parties, and you’d get a thousand people coming to see them, whereas now everyone wants to see the overseas guy and the local guy gets the warm-up slot. But back [then], there was no internet... It was us, and people came to hear us play.
FUCK ’EM AND THEIR LAW
Rozie (punter)
Some bad things: undercover cops posing as ravers. Parties being closed down and kids having nowhere to go and getting into trouble.
Abel
Every party would go all night. Unless it was shut down, which came later – parties did start to get shut down in like ’93, ’94, because they started to get too big, and that’s when the police started stamping down on it. But in the early days, it would just go all night – start at 10 PM, and go till 8 AM.
Phil Smart
What I remember always is the morning and the sunrise, you know, the sun coming up through the warehouse, those high windows. That’s the kind of stuff I remember.
Sugar Ray
The police back then just didn’t have a clue about what was going on. You know, they’d turn up – and I had a guy be on the door, doing security for us – and they’re like, “What’s going on?” And we’re like, “We’re making a music video.” And they’re like, “OK” – and they’d just like drive off, and that was it. And there’d be a thousand people inside just going absolutely nuts.
Abel
It didn’t matter where you were from, whether you were gay, straight, punk, gothic, English – everybody got on. There were no incidents, there were no police. [laughs] Police came, they came for five minutes, and then they’d say, “everything’s fine,” and then they’d leave again.
Phil Smart
I don’t know if I’m supposed to say this on the record, but I know for a fact, from people who actually had to do it, that the police used to get paid off. It should come as no surprise that the police are corrupt – but a brown paper bag deposited at a prearranged location could mean that your party went all night.
THE COMMUNITY
Degrassi (punter)
Someone posted some pictures [of a rave from that era], and I couldn’t get over how late ’80s so many people looked. It was definitely a transitional period where Sydney clubbers were getting introduced to the kind of Madchester way of dressing that so many of the British backpackers brought over with them. Realistically, it made a lot more sense to be wearing big, baggy overalls and long-sleeved T-shirts if you’re going to be sweating and sitting in piles of unknown waste all evening.
Rozie (punter)
In the early days, girls and guys dressed the same; rave fashion was unisex and very comfortable. Later on this changed.
Phil Smart
You would get your English, your baggy ravers – you would get that for sure – but also there was a big hippie vibe coming through Goa and Thailand, and that influence.
Dave (punter)
I think there was a lot of crossover from the DIY punk scene into the feral acid rave scene at this time. The music, same energy as punk; the DJs and punters were like us, too. The crowd and vibe were not that different to the punk crowd: crusty, feral, hardcore, friendly, edgy, like-minded and loose.
Abel
More locals started to catch on – again, it was about that self-expression, everybody was on the same vibe.
Degrassi (punter)
Raves were still really underground, so only a few hundred people were going to the same parties each weekend. You might not have spoken to someone, but if you saw them in the street, you’d usually recognise them and give them a knowing nod: me in my school uniform, someone else in a shirt and tie and someone else in tradie gear, all having something in common. Raves were like this incredible social leveller.
Phil Smart
When I discovered the rave scene it was like something opened up. It appealed to my community spirit, because it was much more like you were part of something. It was like a club. It was the Summer of Love stuff, and everyone was obviously all on the same chemical vibe as well. [laughs]
Ming D
As promoters and DJs, we couldn’t dabble in it, we didn’t want to touch that. It was an ingredient in the whole party landscape, but to be a DJ you had to be above it... You had to put the parties on, you had to play, so that was your job.
OUR GENERATION’S WOODSTOCK
Ming D
Then I decided, OK, we’re going to take this outdoors. And I met Abel when I was working at another record shop – I reckon this would have been early ’90s, 1991. We found this place up in Wisemans Ferry and did all the production, and we dropped a party there. I would say that was Australia’s first outdoor rave... And we got six or seven hundred people there, which was big then.
Sugar Ray
There was a party called Hall of the Mountain King out on this farm. There were about six or seven hundred ravers out on this farm. That was pretty amazing.
Phil Smart
Robin Knight did a Light party out on a farm – this is one where we actually travelled out. And a lot of stuff happened – we almost died on the way back in a car accident, all sorts of stuff – and I remember this guy was juggling oranges. He invited me to play, to juggle as well, throwing them at me and juggle them back. And that has really stuck with me all these years, because that just didn’t happen in any other kind of space, but at a rave where there was the actual physical space, things to play with, people were loose – there were no bouncers, there was no authority, it was just free. That’s probably one of my biggest memories – the freedom of it.
Ming D
It’s the whole thing about seeing the people – you’d drop a track, the sun’s coming up, you’re outdoors, you’re in beautiful nature. It’s just that buzz, it’s that physical buzz of the sound just humming away. The movement of air and everyone having a good time. You could look across and see someone having a good time, smiling, and you could have that connection... You don’t have to say much, it’s just that kind of knowing – OK, we’re here at this place, right here, right now, you know?
Abel
The first Happy Valley, in ’91, was our generation’s Woodstock. What they experienced at Woodstock, we experienced the same thing at Happy Valley. It was the Summer of Love, the same self-expression, all the same elements coming together as one. We had 2,000 people outdoors, and that was triple what warehouses were getting at the time. So it was really big numbers for us. It was a big deal. It was completely outdoors, so if it rained, we would have been shithouse, it would have been like a mudbath... We had a massive Cerwin-Vega soundsystem designed for the outdoors, and we had lighting. It was just magic. The big outdoor stage, all set up in the middle of a paddock. And it was actually a valley. You had to drive down for quite a while to get to it, and it was just beautiful, it was lush.
Degrassi (punter)
One special moment that stands out for me was sitting on the hill looking down over the dancefloor at the first Happy Valley. I was with an old friend and his girlfriend as the sun was coming up and they were playing Candy Flip’s cover of “Strawberry Fields.”
Abel
I’ll never forget it. Everyone united, it was just... Really, you had to be there.
THE RECORD STORES
Ming D
Records were important because it was the exchange – it was this physical exchange. You held the record, you held the music, and people couldn’t get that music, so it gave you the drive and motivation to express your music.
Phil Smart
There used to be places like Central Station and Disco City. There were a few shops in the early days.
Abel
Central Station Records, when they were on Pitt Street. Floppy Disc Records in Wynyard were good with the American stuff – the Nu Groove label, a lot of the American, Detroit stuff that you wouldn’t find at Central. Central would get more of the European stuff. But I didn’t mind shopping at places like Redeye – just to try and find obscure stuff, because all the other DJs were shopping at the same places you were.
Phil Smart
There was a clothing store called Risk, and Ray had started importing records, and he’d just get a couple of crates and sell them at the shop. And he’d ring you up, ring up all the DJs, and say, “Hey, I got a shipment in,” and they’d all go there and buy him out.
Sugar Ray
I was a DJ, I was a junkie and I needed my fix. So I decided that I was going to import records. It’s the same as putting on parties – I wanted to play to people, so the only way was to put on parties. You could get away with it, it was a real DIY kind of [spirit]. You want to open a record shop, you do that; you want to throw a night, and you know you can do it.
Phil Smart
So then Ray was the first to open a rave-specialist record shop in Sydney – Reachin’ Records.
Sugar Ray
There happened to be a little tiny indie rock record shop on Crown Street, and they were closing down and I went in there. I was paying $200-a-week rent, and all of a sudden I started importing records and set it up from there, really – it just kind of all fell into place.
Phil Smart
I think it must have been ’92, ’93 maybe, I started working there.
Sugar Ray
[Phil] came to work for me in my record shop.
Phil Smart
And that was the nexus, a real help for the rave scene... Because it was the only rave shop – you could still buy records at Central and whatever, and they still got good records, but this was a rave-specialist shop. This was in the days when you were still selling tickets and all that kind of stuff. So that’s where you got your flyers, that’s where you got your information, got your tickets as well as your records.
GOD IS A DJ... BUT HE ONLY WARMS UP FOR SASHA
Sugar Ray
The first time Sasha came to Australia there was all this hype over him – he was playing at this massive rave out in Homebush. He came to Australia, and [he] did an in-store at Reachin’. So Sasha turns up, and the shop is just packed. We closed the door, locked the door, all these guys just start lighting up and passing around spliffs, and Sasha just does this two-hour set in front of all of us. Thirty people inside this record shop, and just absolutely blew us all away [with] his mixing. It was the first time I’d heard a DJ mix in key.
Phil Smart
You know Australians – the cultural cringe – they always wanted to know what everyone else thought of us. Very self-conscious. So that’s why when you got internationals, it was a massive deal. Now it’s like a dime a dozen, everyone [brings out] internationals. But at the time, we waited for ages for Sasha to come, and when he came it was an absolutely massive deal for Sydney.
Sugar Ray
That would have been about ’93, ’94. And the funny thing was, then he went out to play at this big rave at Homebush, and that was one of the first kind of Australian ones, and they put him on in the middle of the night. And I just remember everyone standing around on the dancefloor because they just didn’t understand his music. They just wanted bang bang bang, and he was playing this amazing, melodic house.
THE SCHISM
Phil Smart
It pretty well flew under the radar for quite a while, but then there started to be some hassles.
Sugar Ray
I think by the time [the police had] caught on, I’d started to move away from the rave scene. As the kids started to come, the Australian kids started to get involved, I started to lose interest. And I moved into clubs, started DJing in clubs and putting on legitimate events.
Degrassi (punter)
As wonderful as the first Happy Valley was, it really was the beginning of the end for me in terms of the golden era of Sydney raves. It was an amazing rave, but what it did was introduce raves to so many more people and the scene necessarily began to change as a result.
Phil Smart
After a while there was just too much risk, there was just too much heat, and that’s when it started to head back to the clubs.
Ming D
I’m not going to name any promoters; some of them just did it for the money. They would put a shitty soundsystem in a shitty venue, and then they would try to hire the DJs, but then you got to a stage [of saying], “I’m not going to play for these guys again.”
Degrassi (punter)
I think some more dodgy promoters started up and took off with people’s money. I can’t remember which party it was, but I recall a whole heap of tickets were sold to a party and when people called the 0055 number on the night, there was no recording and apparently someone had skipped off with all the money.
Abel
Around ’94, ’95, that’s when the sound really changed on the rave scene. It went faster, harder and younger. I mean, I can’t talk, because I started raving when I was 16, but, in ’94, ’95, you used to see kids as [young] as 12 and 14, and that was a bit strange.
Phil Smart
As the Aussie rave scene took off that became more... It never quite got like the candy ravers did in America, not quite that way, but the more fluoro, more of that kind of stuff is what the Aussie scene became as it got bigger. The music got faster and harder, and it became more mainstream.
Sugar Ray
From about ’93, after us, it was all Nik Fish, Jumping Jack, those boys – I’m good mates with them and I used to play with them a lot as well. But that was their generation.
Phil Smart
The original English rave scene went back to the clubs, and then the Aussie rave scene started to get bigger – you know, basketball courts and small-stadium style, and they went off on their own tangent.
Ming D
The football stadium stuff was not the music that I was into – that was happy hardcore, kiddie-core, so that was not my scene. There was money, I was offered to play, and I said, “Nah.” I was never in it for the money, I was in it for the music, and the people and the culture.
A lot of people I’ve talked to say they didn’t realise it at the time, but I knew this was something special.
Abel
I would still get booked for those things, but I would knock a lot of them back again sometimes. They’d even put me on the bill without asking – they’d advertise your name without actually booking you.
Sugar Ray
It just wasn’t my thing – the music was just too fast, it was too hard, the vibe was dark. When those first English raves started off, everyone got to know the tunes, and as soon as someone dropped a tune with a big piano or a big synth line in it, the whole place – you know, hands in the air. It was just a real loved-up vibe. And I think later on, that kind of got lost. I guess it just evolved and changed and became a little bit darker.
Ming D
People were hearing about it [ecstasy] more, so they were taking more. There were unscrupulous dealers out there who were giving you different crap. The ecstasy might have been [mixed] with speed, so you get more aggressive and the music needs to be harder, faster.
Sugar Ray
Me and Phil both made a move into clubs and sort of slowed it down a little bit more.
Ming D
Look, it’s progress. I’m a believer in progression... Things move forward and that’s just life. I was having a great ball, I was having a great time and I still believed in my music.
Abel
I was always looking for something new. I started with electro and the breakdance era in the ’80s, because that was fresh and new. And ever since then, I’ve always been [playing] new electronic sounds. It’s just a continuation of that, it’s a progression of that.
Sugar Ray
[Phil and I] ended up becoming best friends and brothers on the decks, travelling around the world and putting on parties.
Ming D
Those guys, Phil and Ray and all them, they went [to the] clubs. I liked the adrenaline, I liked the excitement, I liked the vibe of the production, I liked the anti-establishment of it all, so I went into bush doofs. Basically started the doof scene, and we did outdoor psychedelic trance parties and they were magic.
THE LEGACY
Phil Smart
A lot of people I’ve talked to say they didn’t realise it at the time, but I knew this was something special. It was amazing what was happening, and how fresh and new it was. And to discover the rave scene – it changed my life, and it just became what I wanted to do.
Rob (punter)
You could live your perfectly normal life and never know of what went on in the warehouses, and of the adventure of going to find out, and of what it meant to find people and a place away from the main track who just wanted to dance. The relationship with a DJ who could make that happen – the anticipation and release of the perfect drop.
Ming D
Now the music is so accessible. I believe in the power of the music and the emotions, and I’m still a believer in that... Twenty years ago, you had to physically go out, there were no mobile phones, there was no internet. If you wanted to talk to someone you had to literally pick the old analogue phone up and ring. So the music was the common thread, and when you got there, you had the buzz of the music, you had the buzz of the people, and you had the buzz of communication. That was such an important thing in the ’80s and ’90s. You could get out of your house, and in that environment you could express your ideas, talk about crazy stuff, and that interaction was amazing.
Sugar Ray
It was pretty amazing. Just happened to be at the right time in the right place.
To hear a taste of the music that was played in Sydney during this period, tune in to an archival cassette of rave white labels mixed up in 1991 from Sugar Ray below.
A version of this article was first published on redbull.com/music
Header image © Charlie Phetean
