Red Bull Music Academy — Lectures & Artist Interviews (Part 1)

Source: Red Bull Music Academy Daily (daily.redbullmusicacademy.com)
Citation Tier: 2 (established music publication)
Articles: 50

---

Title: Arthur Baker
Date: 2011-01-01
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/arthur-baker--the-man-who-rocked-the-planet

Arthur Baker
The man who rocked the planet rushes through his catalogue
-
When they didn’t dance I’d just break the record and throw it at the dancefloor.
watch now -
Basically, back then, there was no hip hop. It didn’t exist. The roots of hip hop were club music, disco.
watch now -
The guy who did the drums wouldn’t take a cheque, so we didn‘t remember his last name and he never got credit.
watch now
Interviewer
Chairman Mao
Chairman Mao pens regular columns for XXL, the Ego Trip website and other reputable publications with the precision and insight of a true veteran. As well as co-authoring two books, he’s also produced the TV series ‘The (White) Rapper Show’ with his creative collective Ego Trip. Jeff has been at the epicentre of the America’s underground hip hop scene for time, while also opening peoples’ ears to the joy of the cover song: his 'Run For Cover' mixes showcase a deep selection of rare versions of classic songs. Check his ongoing series of shows on RBMA Radio: ‘Across 135th Street’.

---

Title: Brendan M Gillen
Date: 2011-01-01
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/brendan-m-gillen--make-the-transmission

Brendan M Gillen
BMG aka Electromorph recounts the stormy history of Detroits musical heritage
Cape Town 2003
BMG aka Electromorph recounts the stormy history of Detroits musical heritage

---

Title: Carl McIntosh
Date: 2011-01-01
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/carl-mcintosh--tying-up-some-loose-ends

Carl McIntosh
Lessons in slickness with Loose Ends' main man
-
I used to have the helicopter hairdo.
watch now -
It kind of puts up a gate or like a wall between the old and the new and stops it from being fun.
watch now -
It was black or white. You were either doing rock music or you were doing reggae or soul.
watch now -
I was the roughest, I used to have locks and a beard and I used to be in the studio all night. I was rustic.
watch now -
He told us to program a beat just like Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis, The S.O.S. band… And we literally copied.
watch now -
It’s like a coffin and a screen, an amazing thing.
watch now
Interviewer
Chairman Mao
Chairman Mao pens regular columns for XXL, the Ego Trip website and other reputable publications with the precision and insight of a true veteran. As well as co-authoring two books, he’s also produced the TV series ‘The (White) Rapper Show’ with his creative collective Ego Trip. Jeff has been at the epicentre of the America’s underground hip hop scene for time, while also opening peoples’ ears to the joy of the cover song: his 'Run For Cover' mixes showcase a deep selection of rare versions of classic songs. Check his ongoing series of shows on RBMA Radio: ‘Across 135th Street’.

---

Title: Claudio Simonetti
Date: 2011-01-01
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/claudio-simonetti--gothic-disco-godfather

Claudio Simonetti
Italy's horror-prog master: scaring kids four generations and counting
Rome 2004
-
Every time we needed an organ we had to go to the church.
watch now -
We cut the tape for two or three bars, did a loop, and taped it with a mic stand. This was the first sampler!
watch now -
Dario asked us to write the music so the audience always feels like the witches are there, even if there are none on screen.
watch now -
With Vivien Vee, we built an untouchable singer. No one was allowed to speak with her.
watch now

---

Title: Caribou
Date: 2012-01-01
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/caribou--the-artist-formerly-known-as-manitoba

Caribou
The man formerly know as Manitoba on how excellence is born from isolation
-
There’s no reason that because you use a computer it has to sound very digital or small.
watch now -
I made both these albums on Acid. It’s like a demo program for kids.
watch now -
I got into really horrendous progressive rock. I was well into Yes and I had a big mullet.
watch now -
Here were people who weren’t sampling James Brown, they were sampling Czech prog rock records and weird free jazz.
watch now -
It’s either really interesting production or really good melodies that is going to differentiate your music from everybody else.
watch now
Interviewer
Eothen "Egon" Alapatt
Eothen "Egon" Alapatt came to fame as the brainiac business manager of Stones Throw records, though his roots lie in crate-digging, and riffling through phone directories to track down the names and faces behind history’s most obscure acetates, private press funk LPs and jazz masterpieces. These days he puts these sleuthing talents to use in running his own archive label Now Again and managing legendary hip hop producer Madlib. He’s also an incredibly snappy dresser.

---

Title: Debbie Harry and Chris Stein
Date: 2013-01-01
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/blondie

Debbie Harry and Chris Stein
Picture this: Blondie’s founding members recall ’70s and ’80s New York
New York 2013
Interviewer
Benji B
Via his defining, midweek Deviation club night in London—which has now travelled the globe for editions in multiple world capitals—and his must-listen weekly show on BBC Radio 1, Benji B blurs genre lines more dauntlessly than most DJs of his generation. Inspired equally by a myriad of soul, jazz, hip hop, dance music, and the young crop of artists and producers he champions, Benji B is at once tastemaker, intrepid selector, and astute club DJ.

---

Title: Chris Palmer
Date: 2013-01-01
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/chris-palmer--new-ears-resolution

Chris Palmer
As hot and balanced as possible: South Africa's best engineer sets your record straight
Cape Town 2003
As hot and balanced as possible: South Africa's best engineer sets your record straight

---

Title: Daniel Wang
Date: 2013-01-01
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/danny-wang--knock-knock-balihus-there

Daniel Wang
Magic and mathematics with Balihu's disco professor
-
Don’t get a computer!
watch now -
Why did he start making ambient music? Because there was too much loud accordion music in cafés.
watch now -
Theory is only there to explain your pleasure and help you expand it.
watch now -
Everything is perfectly tuned, everything is perfectly in pitch, and it sounds like shit. And there’s a reason.
watch now -
I wouldn’t stop until I found every record on this list, and found out why they were good.
watch now -
Two or three Korean kids would spend all night vogueing. Bam. Bam. Bam. Bam. Everything on the beat.
watch now
Interviewer
Gerd Janson
He holds residencies at two of the best clubs in the universe, Robert Johnson and Panorama Bar; reviews the latest 12" singles for German music reads Spex and Groove; and, of course, releases some of today’s most daring dance music on his own Running Back label—it’s all in a day’s work for Gerd Janson. A true DJ’s DJ, Gerd might dabble with production and remixing, but his natural habitat will always be the DJ booth. From classic house to dreamy disco, just give the guy two turntables and an audience, and the rest will follow.

---

Title: Dre Skull
Date: 2013-05-30
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/dre-skull

Dre Skull
The vybz master tells how he became one of Jamaica’s most in-demand beatmakers
-
In 2008 I made the decision that I wanted to reach out to some Jamaican vocalists.
watch now -
On Snoop Lion: Diplo asked me in on this project, but he couldn’t tell me who it was.
watch now -
On Wavy Spice: We put the instrumental on her phone, and she took it up to the roof to be on her own, and wrote something.
watch now
Interviewer
Davide Bortot
Having sailed Germany’s premier hip hop magazine Juice to its 10-year anniversary as chief editor, this one-time dancehall sound selector and full-time Academy organiser knows a thing or two about breaking down the ice grill. Davide has dissected b-boy bravura to get to the core of some of the world’s biggest artists in hip hop, R&B, and beyond, and penned culture and technology pieces for broadsheets and magazines like Süddeutsche Zeitung, Spex and Das Magazin. When he’s not busy steering the good ship Red Bull Music Academy as “insert very long-winded job title here” (or despairing of his love for notoriously mediocre Munich-based soccer squad TSV 1860), he brings his no-nonsense interview techniques and razor-sharp segues to the Academy couch.

---

Title: Benjamin Wright Jr.
Date: 2015-04-18
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/benjamin-wright-jr-tokyo-2014/

Benjamin Wright Jr.
Benjamin Wright Jr. is the King of Strings, having worked with everyone from Quincy Jones to Mary J Blige to Michael Jackson (his work on the King of Pop’s Off the Wall alone qualify him for the pop Hall of Fame). From early gigs as the musical director of The Temptations and Aretha Franklin to soul-stirring arrangements for everyone from Outkast to UGK to Justin Timberlake, Mr. Wright has seen a lot.
In his 2014 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, Mr. Wright talked through his remarkable career, from meeting Duke Ellington to receiving spiritual guidance for his sounds.
Hosted by Jeff “Chairman” Mao We’re very excited about our guest this afternoon. He’s a composer and
arranger as well as a musician, producer and songwriter. You are undoubtedly
familiar with his work whether you realize it or not, so please welcome Mr.
Benjamin Wright Jr. [applause] How are you? Benjamin Wright Jr. I’m an old man. I’m fine. Thank you very much. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So based on your experience, how do you define the responsibility of an
arranger? Benjamin Wright Jr. Great, number one. Generally, arranger’s create magic. Most time to when we get to track it’s bare, and you have to be, in my opinion, like a great A&R person. You hear something, and you determine what it can be versus what it is. As for me, I get a track, as old as I am, my mind is still
wandering. It’s like stuff is in my head, so I get a track and, man, I start
moving, “Yeah, I want to do this, and I want to do that,” and all of a sudden I start writing. I always have this thing, and please forgive me, but I always pray and it’s God to give me the notes, man. We just had a conversation, as long as I’ve been around, I’ve never been in the session where I have to change something. Jeff “Chairman” Mao You mean change your contribution? Benjamin Wright Jr. Change the notes on the paper or whatever, even before notation software. We just did it by hand. If there was a mistake, it was the copyist. It’s not me, man. [laughs] [applause] Jeff “Chairman” Mao That’s kind of cold, because you were copyist, too. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah, that’s why I know, man. It’s the copyist. Jeff “Chairman” Mao OK, we’ll play a little piece of music from your vast catalog work. We’ll play
a little piece or something. We got a lot of music to go through, but we’ll play a little something maybe you can think back as to what it was you did to it to uphold that responsibility. (music: Dynasty – “Adventures in the Land of Music”) Jeff “Chairman” Mao OK, so that’s a group called Dynasty, right? “Adventures in the Land of Music,” S.O.L.A.R. Records, 1980. Benjamin Wright Jr. The bass player for The Sylvers, Leon, was the producer. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Leon Sylvers III. Benjamin Wright Jr. Leon Sylvers who still has a very amazing musical mind. It seems like I went
crazy a bit, sounds like there was a big budget here, OK? Man, I haven’t heard
that in 25 years. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Sounds okay, still. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah, it’s like I would’ve wrote the same shit today. [laughter] Jeff “Chairman” Mao Well, I think it’s funny this track is a classic, but then a lot of people
learned about the original because it was eventually sampled in a hip-hop
record. But there’s a lot going on at the very beginning of the track. Now,
you did string arrangements on this as well as the horn arrangements. In your mind, I don’t know what you recall from this specifically. But it’s very rhythmic, it’s very punchy, and it really grabs you as soon as you hear the song. That’s the immediate thing that you hear. Benjamin Wright Jr. I think most of my work is kind of rhythmic. That’s because I was a rhythmic
organ player. I had no dexterity and the whole bit like all the cats, man. I
was playing like a guitar player, and I hear stuff like that, stuff has to move. “What’s in the crack right here? I need to put something here, man. Yeah. Surprise. OK. Put the strings in there, that’s the conjunction, tie it together. OK, they’re going to sleep. Hit ‘em! Bow!” That’s the way I write, man. [laughs] [applause] Jeff “Chairman” Mao Well, you’re known for strings – obviously do horns, that’s part of your repertoire as well – but what qualities can these instrumental voices bring to a piece of music? Like, rhythmically or mood-wise. I guess how long does it take for you, first of all, to sit with a piece of music before you begin to write? Benjamin Wright Jr. It’s the spirit. When I was a young cat I was just so full of music, OK? As I
began to grow, assignments were getting heavy. And lots of ‘em, OK? And we’re
speaking before technology and I had to do it with a pen. And I can remember I
came on a chart. [pretends to write arrangement charts] “OK, OK. Copyist,
next. What time is it? It’s 3:00 in the morning. I got two more charts,
session is at 10:00. Copyist. Whoo, I made it.” Now, you have to think about the quality where you’re really on it and the whole bit, and this is where I have to say the blessings come in, because most of my work get on the charts. There’s some things that didn’t make, whatever, but I’m going to make a bold statement. I’m going to say 95% of what I’ve written got on [the charts]. OK?
For the other 5% I’m going to say, some jacked up songs, man. [laughs] Like I said, the quality of whatever and I’m very strong about that. I had a conversation with a cat yesterday, younger cat I was talking to, and I said, “One of the lessons
that I learned early, as a young arranger, you just write. You write over everything – you just write. You just write.” And I remember the session on old trumpet player, pulled me to the side, “Hey, young blood, let me speak to you.” “OK.” He says, “Have you ever seen a breath mark?” “Yeah.” However, I had never payed attention to a breath mark. “Yes, sir.” He said, “You need to incorporate that.” In his words he said, “You’re writing your ass off.” He
said, “But music has to breathe.” It’s like, “Wow! What a lesson.” Because I wasn’t concerned about anything else in the track, it’s just what was in my head, which was a lot of notes. And being a brass player, the cat said, “Damn! I got to breathe. You’re killing us.” That was 40-something years ago. And that stands out in my mind all the time. Get out of the singers’ way, just
accompany them. OK, this guitar players saying something very important here,
“Move, get your butt out of the way.” Write something to talk to [and] be in a conversation with him. That kind of thing. So that’s going on and I hear a lot
of things and I say, “Oh young writer,” because he’s over everything. “Let the
music breathe.” That was my lesson. Jeff “Chairman” Mao You’re from Greenville, Mississippi originally, correct? Benjamin Wright Jr. Yes. Jeff “Chairman” Mao What kind of opportunities [were there] for an African-American person were coming up in those years? Benjamin Wright Jr. Can you spell none? [laughter] Let me explain. Being an African-American in that time – guys, I’m 70-years-
old, so I’m talking a long time ago. What was happening in my hometown in Mississippi, and still is, is blues. Nothing but blues. In the civilized world we have 16 bar blues. In Mississippi then, it might be 12 and a half bars, 15 bars, 13 bars. What the hell is that? You learn follow the singer.
The singers have no idea about music, it’s just whatever they feel they go to
it. I learned that early. That has helped as a conductor, because no matter who
the singer is, and you got a symphony orchestra on stage, and the singer gets
excited and go where he’s not supposed to be, or she... And this is another point, too, I always number each bar. Because when somebody gets lost, and you’re in real time you say, “Bar 32.” “Bar 32? OK, let me count back. Because
it go to letter C, that’s bar...” OK, “Damn! You missed it.” So I number each bar. OK, we’re lost. On my downbeat we had 32. Three, four, boom, we’re all together again. You know what I’m saying? I don’t you guys, whatever, but for old people we number the bar so we can always... It’s very important when you’re live with a big orchestra. ‘Cause [you] don’t have a lot of rest
because the orchestra is going to go to get sleep, man. It’ s like [pretends
to talk to orchestra members], “OK, may I have your attention? Wake up. Wake
up. Hey, touch him. OK, here we go. Bang!” You know what I’m saying? It’s important. It’s important. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So given your interest in music, how did you overcome the obstacles? I think you had said before when we were talking that the teachers in school would tell you, “You can do one or two things with your career...” Benjamin Wright Jr. OK, let me go back a bit. Doing blues, whoever came through town I would meet
them. All the musicians, because that’s what I wanted to do. So a lot of times
my parents would not know where I was, because if somebody came through town,
and unfortunately, I don’t want to just cast all blues people are the same.
But most time they’d be drunk and shit. [laughs] So you say, “Hey, man, you need a bass player?” Guys would say, “Where’s the bass player?” [pretends to be dead
drunk] ”Yeah, come on new blood.” So I’m gone. Tell your parents? No, I’m
just gone. “You need a drummer? Piano player?” Whatever, I was there. OK? Now, I eventually end up being able to play with the school band director’s band, where you had to have white shirt and black pants. You learn to get to the gig before time because he puts on the after six jacket. I was a little bitty cat, man. If I messed around and be late, I get a 46 jacket on
me. It’s only touched me on my shoulder. So, that was a good lesson, in terms
of being on time the whole bit. And doing that I just formulated in my mind,
“This is what I want to do.” Now, it comes to graduating time in high school. Today we’re familiar with how the counselors speak to everybody individually. Ooh, we had some of that. My counseling was, and let me be very open about it, “Your grades are not good, your mama doesn’t have any money, you’re dark. I suggest you try and get a job at the post office or go to the army.” That’s it. “I don’t work at no damn post office.” [laughter] And my mind never imagined being in the military, OK? “What are you going to
do?” “I’m going to be a professional musician.” “What is that?” That didn’t
exist in my hometown. There were people who played music on the weekends or whatever, but a professional musician? No. I got a little story, I’m full of stories. A few years ago my high school band director came to LA, called me, I sent my wife to pick him up because I was in session. Came to the house, I’m so excited to have him, he sat in the studio. I’m doing some guitar overdubs.
And to show you how naïve even my band director was, we finished with the
guitar, and he asked the guitar player, “Son, what’s your real job?” The
guitar player looks at me like, “What the hell is he talking about? I play
guitar, I make about 300 grand a year, and he’s asking me what my real job is?”
Well, my band director is from Greenville, Mississippi. Nobody could have
imagined a 9 to 5 musician. You know what I’m saying? When I said, I want to
be a professional musician, I didn’t know about the 9 to 5. Because there were
no recording studios where I am from or whatever. I knew that there was some
studio somewhere but that wasn’t in my realm. I just wanted to be a musician
and God blessed me to be that. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Just by being smart on your feet and sitting in when you could and eventually
joining a band. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah. Now, there’s another thing, and I hope I am not getting ahead of myself,
but in terms of writing, being in that environment pre-integration, we only
had one junior and high school for the black kids. The band was like, we had
about like 450 band members, it’s a hell of a size band. One band director. He
had no assistant, whatever. We were an award-winning band. We were bad. We had
an attitude the whole bit, OK? But we went to the band director and say, “Hey,
man. We want to play what’s on the radio at the football games.” Band director
said, “What? You know what you’re saying?” “Yeah, we want to play what’s on
the radio at the football games.” He said, “No way, man. I have parades, I
have competitions, ceremonies, four, five other things. And it’s just me. You
want to play what’s on the radio? Go write it.” I’m like, “Write it? How do you
write?” The three of us got together and we were able to figure out to some degree what the melody was of the tune that we really wanted to play on the radio. I don’t remember what it was, but we did that. We didn’t know anything about harmonizing, whatever. Just the melody. The drums, the tuba, the
clarinets, trumpets, trombones, we didn’t have french horns, we had
mellophones. Everybody playing the melody. The crowd went, “Yay!” It was the
worst-sounding shit in the world, man. But that approval messed with my head. I said, “Wow, I want to write.” And that’s what I started doing. Jeff “Chairman” Mao When did you get your first formal education, training in writing and
composing? Benjamin Wright Jr. OK, I have to take you back. I got drafted into the military, OK? And instead
of me doing Uncle Sam’s job I opt to study music. At that particular time,
this is about ‘64/’65, there was a new school in Boston called Berklee School
of Music. I don’t think anybody here is old enough to remember that at that
particular time the Berklee School of Music was only a correspondence school. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Which meant? Benjamin Wright Jr. When you registered and the whole bit, they sent you homework. You study and
whatever and ‘da-da-da-da,’ figure it out and mail it back to the school. Then
they will mail you the results. I also took the Carl Fisher correspondence, and
the military had a department of defense theory class for band members, but
because I was a G.I., I was entitled to it. So that was my study. I never knew
what anything sounded like, but praise God I always made 100s on my homework.
One of the things that bothered me more than anything were strings. “Treble
clef, OK. Bass clef, OK. Violas? Movable clef.” I had that in school, but my
homework was always a 100. But I never felt comfortable about that until I got
my first gig to write for strings. I’m nervous. What made me nervous is that,
will I get the violas right? So I go to the studio, I’m looking at viola
players, it’s like, “I hope I get this right.” They begin to play and then it
got into a divisive thing when they [play] the harmonies there. I listened,
they were right. I got attitude, I say, “Yeah, I can do this.” [laughs] And
that’s how it’s been ever since, so I was very blessed. But my education
started with correspondence stuff, OK? I was a timpani player in a high school
band. I thought it was cute, but that didn’t help in terms of me trying to
play keyboards or whatever. All of that came later. I was doo-woping, I was
singing, playing drums. After I started arranging and the whole bit and hooked
up with a wonderful band called The Pieces of Peace. We were a session band,
so we did all of the heavy stuff in Chicago. Since I was writing everything I
was trying to encourage the cats, “Hey man, we ought to go to school.” “Yeah,
right. We’re going to go to school.” Now, I’m just telling the story on
everybody. Everybody was drugged out but me. “So when are we’re going to go to
school?” They would always tell me, “Yeah. OK. Hey, man we’re going to
register next week.” Next week, next week, next week, always next week. I
finally decided, I’m going to go down to the Chicago Conservatory and register. This is my story. I went down, and I’ll never forget it, it was a Thursday, the third week in October. I come in, “Can I help you?” “Yes, ma’am.m I want to go to school here.” “This is a music school.” “I know.” “What is your background?” “Well, I’ve played in quite a few bands.” The lady laughed her ass off because most of the people that came in here already had a degree in music. She just thought it was a joke, man. And I’m feeling kind of funny
here. She hit me with a heavy duty question. “Do you think you could pass an
entrance exam?” Now, I’m about to panic, so I felt like, “OK, I’ll take it, but
I’m going to go home and study over the weekend and I’m going to come back and
I’m going to take it.” She said, “Come with me young man.” I follow her, she
take me to a little library section and pulled out the entrance exam. “Oh my
God, do I die here?” I looked at it and I began to answer the questions. And
God was certainly with me because I did it in record time. So I go back to her
and she say, “Oh, you decided not to take it.” I say, “No, no, no, ma’am. I
took it.” “But you got some questions on here, where you sight-sing songs and
then name them.” “I don’t know the name of the songs but I can sight-sing this
to you.” “OK.” One, I sight-sang. Two... She said, “Oh my God!” I made 100 on
the entrance exam to the Chicago Conservatory. This was a Thursday. Monday
morning I started class. When I got to school Monday morning, everybody in the
school knew who I was. Come on man, it’s amazing what God can do, OK? [applause] Jeff “Chairman” Mao Did you still have an interest in being a performer? You mentioned The Pieces
of Peace, I don’t know if anybody here is familiar with the band, but it
really was an important band in the development of Chicago music from that
era, from the late ‘60s going into the ‘70s, from the soul era into the funk
era. Did you still have an ambition to be a performer yourself or were you
more focused on being a composer? Benjamin Wright Jr. The Pieces of Peace was an outstanding band, very creative, sick individuals.
We were stage and take off all your clothes, we had a strobe light, nobody had
a strobe light then. [laughs] Mind you, here it is, even today I never
drank, I never smoke, I’ve never been high. But I was with cats who would just get drugged out. I’m following them, whatever they did, “OK, man. Boom.” We were definitely performers. Jeff “Chairman” Mao [shows photo on screen] That’s the Pieces of Peace right there. Benjamin Wright Jr. Wow, yeah. I’m the cute one. [laughter] So in terms of performing we were definitely performers but we were a very
serious session band. We left the country to per se, get ourselves together
because we got tired of performing with other people, and we would go on the
road with Jackie Wilson and stuff like that because of the record company.
“You know we’re going to take these gigs overseas, man, get ourselves
together.” It didn’t work that way. We fell out. Totally out. Cats would say,
“Yeah, man, when we get back to Chicago don’t call me.” “Don’t call me either,
man.” It’s like, “Wait a minute, I’m not from Chicago. What am I going to do?”
Well, God had another plan for me. We got back to Chicago. Jeff “Chairman” Mao You got stranded though? Benjamin Wright Jr. Basically. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Where did you get stranded? Benjamin Wright Jr. Coming back to America [we got stranded] in Brussels. [laughs] But I finally got back home, but I had no money or whatever. I had nowhere to go. I could have been back in Brussels it would have been better, but things begin to happen. I began to write, and being the true wonderful person that I am, I call all the Pieces of Peace to
play on the sessions. OK? And it just grew and grew and grew, whatever. Now,
mind you, I was a copyist back in the day. Donny Hathaway, a lot of people
don’t know before the record company found that he could sing, he was an
outstanding arranger. Charles Stepney, we know Mr. Stepney mainly from the
Earth, Wind & Fire stuff, and Rotary Connection, all the Chess stuff. I’m
sorry, Cadillac Records to the young people. Richard Evans, who passed away
last week, God bless him, an old cat there, it was all of these cats, Gene
Barge, OK? So I was a copyist, man, I was making it that way and I was just
learning, learning, learning. So all of a sudden I started arranging. I didn’t
have the big record artist like everybody has had. I was dealing with the
local stuff, but it was piling up. Oh my God! I was as busy as a one-legged man
in a kicking contest. It was happening, man. All of a sudden, now I’m doing
major label stuff. It’s happening, and I was a cat that was stranded. Jeff “Chairman” Mao I will play an example of something from that era, and as you said, there’s a
lot of records coming out at Chicago at that time. It was very plentiful era
as far as independent record companies, independent groups and people pressing
up their own things. But just to give folks an idea of the sort of string
things Mr. Wright was doing at that time. (music: The Majestic Arrows – “The Magic of Your Love”) Benjamin Wright Jr. Mystic Magic? Jeff “Chairman” Mao It’s the Majestic Arrows. Benjamin Wright Jr. Majestic Arrows, OK. I can see their producer. I think there’s two, three
people in the group and their father had the label. Yeah, he was a bad man,
but he loved me. Jeff “Chairman” Mao It’s funny because you say you got a lot of work, you must have also been held
in high esteem, because there’s an album by a group called The Southside
Movement that you worked on. And I remember looking on the back before I came
out here and speak to you and it says, I don’t remember the exact words, but
it says, “Special thanks to Ben Wright and God.” So you got top billing over
God. What was up with that? [laughter] Benjamin Wright Jr. Man, OK. They were a self-contained band, maybe like Lakeside or something
like that at that time. I did a lot of writing for them. I wrote some of the
songs and the whole bit. Their manager, producer, everything, was really the
guy who opened the door for me at Chess Records. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Was that Vanleer? Benjamin Wright Jr. Jimmy Vanleer, yeah. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Did you have ambitions to produce as well? Benjamin Wright Jr. In the beginning that didn’t phase me, I just wanted to do music. Then I found
that maybe cats was using me up. Because I’m doing the music, I’m in the studio, I’m dealing with their vocals and the whole bit, it’s like, “Yeah, let Benjamin take care of everything. He’s got it.” In a sense, it was good because I was honing my craft, learning how to do everything. Then I started
going to the console, and boom, I’m becoming an authority on everything. Even
when I would work for the superstar producers I was so in charge, and maybe
that’s because of a personality thing, that cats let me do everything. I was
not billing for producing, just writing the music. I’m smarter today, thank
you. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So you leave Chicago, you go to LA? Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Why? Benjamin Wright Jr. The music industry moved to LA We all know that, I think around ‘73 or something, Motown said, “Hey, we’re going to LA” And Chicago was a hub, man. You wanted a record deal? You had to come to Chicago. But that changed, even though when Donny Hathaway left Chicago, I became the man. Had all the work and the whole bit, but the industry was moving West. So, hey man, I moved
West. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And you were a music director at that time in addition to working? Benjamin Wright Jr. Here’s my LA story. In Chicago, I ended up being the music director for The
Dells, which was heavy duty and a great learning experience, musically. Jeff “Chairman” Mao What does a music director do? Benjamin Wright Jr. Well, in those road settings, most times you end up writing the charts for the stage and being supervisor to how the vocals are to be done and the whole bit. Really learning, it was great spot to be in. Conduct the orchestras, the whole bit. I went to LA. What happened, I have grown so, I was being called to LA to do dates. You fly in, fly back. Fly in, fly in back. One particular time, I flew in to LA supposed to do this album, supposed to be there five days. Ten
days later I was still there, so I call my then loving wife, “Baby, sell
everything. We’re going to move to LA.” “What? You got to be out of your
mind.” I couldn’t understand that because my wife had no job. I took care of
everything, but I never want to argue. It puzzled me. “OK, no problem.” Went
back to Chicago from the airport to the Loop. If you know anything about
Chicago, to the Loop. My office was in the Chess Building, 21st Street, tell
the secretary, “Hey, I’m out of here.” I get all my stuff off the desk. Mr.
Jerry Butler was across the hall, “What’s happening, Ben?” I say, “Hey, man.
I’m moving.” He tried to dissuade me from going to LA. I don’t know why, but
my mind was made up. I went home to my loving wife, “Hi,” took me about four
days to get my stuff together. On the fourth day about 5:00 in the morning,
two guys came over. One guy that helped me, one guy who needed a ride to LA,
he was a drummer. “So, OK. Hey, man, you drive the truck and I’m going to
drive this car.” While moving stuff around it awakened my wonderful wife. And
she’s like, “What’s going on? What’s happening?” “I’m moving.” “What do you
mean you’re moving?” “Baby, don’t you remember I called you. I said sell
everything, we are moving. You hit me with some bullshit. I’m moving.” “What
about me?” Then I went into another bag, I can’t use those words in here, and
I’m out. That’s it. I went to LA, I had no money. No relatives. It’s crazy.
Like pioneers, just get up and go. I got an apartment after about three days
and I was coming out of the apartment and somebody says, “Hey, Benjamin.” I
looked around and I knew the guy. The guy who’s named Mickey Stevens. For some
of the older people, if you look at some of the old Motown stuff, Marvin Gaye,
Stevie Wonder, whatever, you see “M. Stevens.” He was a big man. “What are you
doing here?” I said, “Man, I just moved here.” “You got to be The Temptations’
music director.” I have no money. No job. Temptations is the hottest thing on
the planet and this is how I answered, “Mickey,” I hope the tape don’t break,
“I didn’t come out here to be no motherfucking Temptations’ music director.”
[laughs] No money, no job whatever. Temptations is the hottest thing in the
world. The word got around LA, even before I had a telephone, Benjamin Wright
is going to be the Temptations’ music director. I fought that for a month.
Finally, a lot of cats was like, “Hey Benjamin, I think this would be good for
you to help set yourself up on the West Coast.” I finally did. It was the
worst job I ever had at that moment because their former music director, had
lost all the music. At that time everybody performed with orchestras. There was not one song in the book that had all the parts to it. I had to take a cassette player of an existing show and start writing. If you can imagine, everything is orchestra. You hear the saxophones playing, and then you had the
doubles. It was like, OK, clarinets, flutes, whatever. OK, now the first alto
player go to piccolo or whatever, you know, it was a job. It took me about a month and a half to rewrite the book. As God would have it, six months later I was producing The Temptations. So it all worked out. Jeff “Chairman” Mao It all worked out, yeah. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And you did a little bit more arranging as well? Benjamin Wright Jr. Yes. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Let’s play something and you tell us, I think people might know the song. And
you tell us how this happen? (music: Michael Jackson – “Don’t Stop ’Til You Get Enough”) Benjamin Wright Jr. [comments over music] I don’t remember that, man. I got to stand up. I got
to talk. I got to talk. As you can see I was growing in LA, OK? One day I get
this call, “Benjamin Wright?” “Yes?” “It’s Quincy Jones.” “Quincy who?” “This
is Quincy Jones.” “Yeah, right. Quincy, who?” “This is Quincy Jones.” Quincy
is so big that he halfway understood the impact he would have him with a young
cat. So he began talking, “Hey man, Michael Jackson is going to do this solo
album and such, and such, and such, and so we would like you being part of
it.” I’m still like, “This ain’t no Quincy Jones.” But the cat gave me an
address to go to in Bel Air and none of my friends lived in Bel Air. I went to
this address, the lady opened the door was his wife. I knew that was his wife,
Peggy Lipton, because she had been in the television program. She takes me in
to see Q, I’m nervous as hell, and the cat made me feel very comfortable,
being talking, talking and talked about Chicago because Q had spent a lot of
time in Chicago long before me as Vice President of Mercury Records, Lesley
Gore, “It’s my party and I cry...” Everybody know that was Quincy Jones. Being
very comfortable or whatever, he gave me a song and he gave me 30 days. I
never had 30 days to do anything, OK? Twenty-eight days later, I still hadn’t
written anything. I started praying on it and God had a message for me, “You
better put some notes on this paper.” [laughter] I finally wrote something. I get to the session and I’m very confident guy.
Everybody know, Benjamin, he is in charge, man. I get to the session, I’m
nervous as hell. I mean, this is Quincy Jones. Somebody says, “Ben?” “Yeah?”
It’s Bruce Swedien. “Wow!” Well, Brunswick [Records], you know, I grew up on
Bruce [Swedien]. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Bruce was the engineer for the session. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yes. Then Bruce says, “Hey, Q. Ben is here. It’s got to be a piece of cake.”
Oh man. I don’t need that, I’m already nervous. We finally get the musicians
in order and we start the session. All of a sudden the real Benjamin begin to
come through. I’m in charge. “OK, you’re not phrasing correctly.” “Look at bar
so and so and so.” “Look at the [chart] markings, please.” “Yeah, come on,
come on.” Start playing the music and I can see in the control room Quincy is
falling on his knees. I was like, “Oh my God, I really must be messing up.”
Because this is the second time I’ve seen him, OK? I said, “Oh my God. OK,
what am I going to do?” We finish the take. I very hesitantly walked into the
control room because I see Quincy falling out, he’s pissed off. But when I got
in there, he wasn’t pissed off. He was screaming. “Damn! This is the shit.
Wow! Man!” You know, you don’t think of Quincy Jones like that. I’m still
nervous, but finally I really understood he liked what was happening. And that
was “Don’t Stop ’Til You Get Enough.” To confirm it, he gave me another song.
I think you got that one. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Yeah, we do have that one. (music: Michael Jackson – “Rock With You”) Benjamin Wright Jr. [comments over music] I ain’t mad. [laughs] Jeff “Chairman” Mao The thing that really is propelling this forward with this strings is this
[imitates build up before the chorus] “dadadadananan,” right? Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Is that part of the original composition in any way? Is it inspired by something else? Is it inspired by anything else that you heard in the track that they gave you or the music that they gave you? Benjamin Wright Jr. No, it’s setting up. I think I’m in the cracks. Based upon what’s happening I
had to find my spot, and for all these wonderful music majors, final cadence,
I couldn’t go there, I couldn’t put a period on it. “Dadadadadada,” so it’s
something behind that. “Dadadadada” but when I go, “Mmmm” that’s a period.
Like, “Stop, that’s it and you go back to the beginning.” Other than that, it’s what I’m feeling inside. It seemed like it worked. [laughs] Jeff “Chairman” Mao Yeah, I think so. Now, you said “blanket” when we got to the verse. We hear
the riff you just talked about, and then the punctuation and then you go in to
the verse. And when we were listening to it earlier you said “blanket.” What
did you mean by that? Benjamin Wright Jr. OK. When I have to write footballs like whole notes, I think my voicings are
warm. My manager’s right here and he’s heard me say something, you’re coming
with something I say, “Hey man, I need to put a blanket around that.” I’m
going to make it very warm, so the singer can just soar. I won’t be in his or
her way. Just put a blanket around there. I need the contrabasses and the
cellis, whatever, and I put the violas real close to the cellis and it’s like
warm. That’s what I call it. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And what range are you using the parts of the strings? Benjamin Wright Jr. With the contrabasses, a lot of times we will drop them way down, even below
the staff. Or, if it’s too muddy there, I’ll split them up, active above. Celli, I don’t do the fifth, I might do the third. Let’s say, if it’s a C major triad I’ll put the celli... We call it the C major #9 per se. I’ll put celli on a B on top of the staff, top of the bass staff. Second celli, first
celli I’ll put on a D, so it’s playing a #9 there. Then I will take the viola
and put them on the third E. Now, we don’t worry about a clash between the
violas and the celli because of the octave there, we’re talking open harmony.
Then I’ll take the first violin, drop the G in there. Then I’ll take the first violin put that on the major #7. OK? But the key is I got the first celli playing the D. We call it second, I’m going to call it my #9. Because it’s warm right there. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And you’re also keeping in consideration the dynamic range of where it is the voices coming in to? Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Michael’s voice is occupying somewhere, you’re complementing this? Benjamin Wright Jr. Again, as there is an engineer here so I have to be very careful what I say. I
also write taking into consideration who has to mix. In terms of the strings,
in terms of the blanket, that’s going to be a given for me. But I have to go
back into the rhythm track. A lot of times, to the piano player I might have
to say, “Hey man, take the left hand down another octave. It’s too cluttered
in there.” Then I have to deal with the guitars, most times it’s two guitars.
And most times the guitar players, they don’t care they’re just going to jump
right in, right where the piano player is. It’s like, “No, no. Can’t mix that.
It’s too cluttered. Open it up. OK, revoice. Give me a second version.”
Whatever, so, and so, and so. I got to spread it out. Maybe I’m just looking
out for myself because for this space that’s been created, “Hello, here comes
my blanket.” So it’s warm and everybody has a region where the mixer can say,
“Oh, a piece of cake. It’s easy to mix.” Jeff “Chairman” Mao What was Michael’s reaction? Benjamin Wright Jr. I had met Michael two, three times before. In my session that he showed up
at, he had nothing to say. It was Q who was fallen over. Michael is a very mild mannered and then he can become a beast because he’s a perfectionist. I always tell a story
about him, I use a comparison. You get a singer come in and, “OK, sing it.” He
hit the button and say, “Hey man, can you do that again please?” “Hey man I
just did it.” “OK, but just do it again.” “OK, man. How was that?” “Wow! It’s
great, man. But I think if we could get one more.” “Hey, man. I ain’t singing
this shit no more. I’ve been singing three, four times, man.” “OK, get it.”
Now he’s put a bad vibe on the control room. So they say, “No problem. We got
it, man. Come on in. Yeah, I knew y’all had it.” “OK.” “Hey man, let me have a
few dollars to catch the bus home.” “OK.” Michael Jackson! [sings] “Da-da-
da-da-da,” “Mike, that’s it. That’s the shit, man. That’s it.” [imitates
Michael] “I want to do one more time.” “OK. Give him another track, Bruce.”
“Da-da-di.” [enthusiastically] “That’s it! Yeah!” [imitates Michael] ”No,
I think I want to do it one more time.” Two hours later everybody is like, “Oh, Mike. Come on. Damn, man.” But Mike doesn’t have to borrow money to get the bus home. He’s got a billion in his pocket. You know what I’m saying? You see the attitude. Somebody who really wants to make it. I used to do stuff on Paul Anka. Paul Anka got two Learjets. Jeff “Chairman” Mao He got that Tonight Show money. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah, hello, for what? Forty-some years,six nights a week. “Dada-dadada” Come on what’s that? Maybe about 10, 12 million year? But he would stand there all night. No problem. I learned, in case one day I get some money, I’ll do it all night. Whatever. So
that’s something for a lot people to pay attention to because it’s the
attitude and willingness to have it perfect. As perfect as it can be. Jeff “Chairman” Mao I know you said with “Don’t Stop ’Til You Get Enough” you focused, did a little praying and then the notes came out, but I think there was a little bit more than divine intervention involved in that, right? That’s the signature riff in the song more or less. That’s the thing, again, as soon as you hear it, that’s what you remember. And you can go back and listen to Off The
Wall, there’s like a deluxe edition that has the demo version. It doesn’t
have the strings. And it’s a different type of feeling, obviously. What are you thinking when you come up with that? Benjamin Wright Jr. I got a deadline. [laughs] That was it. That was it. When you get that kind
of assignment you say, Quincy Jones, what are you going to write? The man has
bunch of Grammys, movies, everything. He was an arranger. What do you write? I
was scared. I guess he scared the shit out of me, so that’s all came out. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Alright. Let’s listen to this. This is another track that you did the strings and horns for which I think people would know. (music: Earth, Wind & Fire – “Boogie Wonderland”) Benjamin Wright Jr. [comments over music] I got to stop you. OK. I love cartoons. If you go back to the old cartoons, the music was happening, man. They captured everything. The little birds, the worms, the bears, whatever. Jeff “Chairman” Mao OK, so cartoons played a role in that? Benjamin Wright Jr. Oh yeah. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Obviously, some timpani in here. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah. Jeff “Chairman” Mao That was your thing, that’s back to your roots? Benjamin Wright Jr. That’s what brought this whole thing on. This song was not for Earth, Wind & Fire, this was for a group called the Curtis Brothers, Al McKay, the
then guitarist for the Fire was producing The Curtis Brothers. Now, Maurice
called me, “Hey man...” Jeff “Chairman” Mao Maurice White. Benjamin Wright Jr. Maurice White. I’m quoting, “Hey, man Al fucked up a lot of money, we ain’t got no hit. Can you do something with this, you know how to do those timpanis and stuff, man?” “Yeah, no problem.” It was a big session. All of the heads from the record company or whatever, plus I used about 50 men. Jeff “Chairman” Mao This is 50 pieces. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Full orchestra? Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah. This brings on another thing too because we set up with the engineer.
Strings first, “OK, guys. We need to run this down so the engineers can get the
levels. OK? Start playing.” We play straight through, first time. Maurice comes out of the control room, “Hey, man. That’s it.” Now, my immediate thinking is I’ve must have done something wrong because we just running it down to get levels. I’m like, “What’s up?” “No, that’s it.” “That’s it?” “Yeah,
man. That’s it.” “OK, get the strings out here. Bring the horn players in.”
“What the hell is going on here? Get the horn players in.” Play. We did
several takes, I wasn’t happy with how things were being phrased, but my mind
is still in those string players. Little did I know he was happy. One take. And I’m thinking, “We’re just playing it down to get the levels.” Now, today, sold a
billion records. I’m still pissed off about the strings. [laughter] It brings on another term. You have producers, and you have reducers. Let me
say that again. Some guys are producers, some guys are reducers. Maurice White
made a producers call. However it felt to him and the whole bit, that’s it.
And it worked. So, I ain’t really mad. Jeff “Chairman” Mao But what would you have changed? We all just listened to this. What is bothering you in this particular take that you would have done differently? Benjamin Wright Jr. I’m a strickler, especially at that time. It wasn’t technology then, so nobody
knew what was on the paper, but me. Nobody knows what it is supposed to feel
like, but me. When the phrasing is not what I feel it should be, then we do it
over. At least let me talk it through, “Hey guys, I need you to do such and
such, so on, so on, so, bar so-and-so, or whatever.” This was a run down. You
cat accepted a run down. I guess he knows more about it than me. Jeff “Chairman” Mao I think it’s sounds OK. [laughter] Did you notice at a certain point as music changed that people were not using the big orchestras the way they were? Benjamin Wright Jr. My pocket noticed it first. Jeff “Chairman” Mao How did you adjust? Benjamin Wright Jr. I really didn’t make any adjustments. I looked at it this way. As everybody in this room knows, all the music in the world come from five lines and four spaces. Some people call it jazz. Some call it rock & roll. Some call it gospel. Whatever. Hip-hop. It’s not but 12 notes in the whole universe. I didn’t feel that I need to change anything. I wrote the same way. It’s the record companies that stopped. I don’t know if you guys remember, I think in the early ‘80s, Capital Records signed an act called The Knack ... and they recorded in the garage. Capitol paid 40 grand for the album. Back at that time, I thought I was somebody because all my albums, whatever I was working on, I had a half million dollar budget. Well, wait a minute. This rock & roll thing sold through the roof, for 40 grand. OK, no more big budgets. I died, you know, but you still had some artists who stick to the real deal. One of the artists that we talk about – I’ll give you a story about this young man right here, this is... Can you stand up a minute, sir? [applause] This my manager. Young fellow. Cute, too. But there’s another story involved. This is also my godson. You know, I have to tell it all. This is the cat that used to run around the house with my other children. His father died when he was 10, 11 years old. So he became my son, OK? Now with him running around the house, break dancing with all the other kids, falling on their heads and stuff, went to college. He never paid any attention to what I did, until he went to college. You need to tell this, please. Went to college. Do take it from the college. Audience Member I went to college. I’m not as animated. I didn’t go to college and dance and fly and all these things. But I had a cover band, and we were covering a lot of N.E.R.D. songs. I love N.E.R.D., but I had a bunch of guys in the band that I put together who love soul and funk, so we would start doing some older covers. Then we would also find some stuff in between, so one of the guys was a big Raphael Saadiq fan. He’s worked a lot with Raphael. One of the songs he did was the one with D’Angelo, “Be Here.” There’s a lot of strings in there. It’s like [imitates strings] I was like, “It’s clean. Who did that?” I’m going through the credits. I’m like, “Nah, that was crazy. Nah, that’s not him.” So I look up, looking at all these credits. I’m like, “Earth, Wind and Fire. Michael Jackson. Gladys Knight.” I called my mom first, like, “Mom, is that that lady, Gladys, that we were always hanging out with? Was that Gladys?” [laughter] She was like, “Yeah, Jamal.” I was like, “OK, I’m gonna call you back.” Call Mr. Wright. He’s like, “How’s Jamal. How’s the band going?” “The band’s doing great. We’re doing some great covers. You know, it’s a lot of fun. I’ll send you something one of these days. Working on a song right now, though. I think do you... do you work in music?” [laughter] I was like, “These strings...” He was like, “Yeah, man.” I was like, “You work with the artists? Like you’re actually in it?” He was like, “Yeah, man.” I’m seeing the credit on Earth, Wind and Fire. He’s like, “Yeah, yeah, yeah, that was me.” I’m like, “Micheal Jackson?” He’s like, “Dude, you don’t see that there’s a big old plaque when you walk in my door?” I was like, “I ...” [laughter/applause] Benjamin Wright Jr. That’s amazing, because I thought he was joking. So I’m laughing my butt off, but he was really serious. Now, like I say, he’s been playing in the house since he was a little kid, and there are plaques all over the house. Jeff “Chairman” Mao It wasn’t a secret then, yeah. Benjamin Wright Jr. But dealing with Raphael Saadiq is one of the cats who’s like, “I don’t care what these new cats are doing, whatever. I want live strings.” Justin Timberlake is like, “I want live stuff.” So there’ve been some cats along the line who still insist on live music. Praise God. I couldn’t eat. Jeff Mao This is one of the people from that era as well who wanted live music. (music: Outkast – “The Love Below (Intro)” / applause) Jeff “Chairman” Mao OK, so what happened when Andre Benjamin met Benjamin Wright? Benjamin Wright Jr. I got a call. Cat saying, “Sir, my name is Andre Benjamin, and it was suggested that I come see you.” And he was a nice guy. I said, “Come on over.” I had no idea who Andre Benjamin was. I did not know who Outkast was. I knew some songs they did, because there’s one I really love. [sings “Ms. Jackson“] I love that. But I didn’t know who that was. So the cat comes over. I have daughters and granddaughters. So all of a sudden, it sounded like it was a traffic accident. [screams] I was like “Hey, what the hell is going on in there?” “It’s Andre Benjamin!” “Who in the fuck is Andre Benjamin?” At this time, the cat is coming through, just about in my studio. He says, “How are you doing Mr. Wright, I’m Andre Benjamin.” Oh shit, OK. “Well hey man, I’m Benjamin.” And it seemed like I was much older, so I had seniority. So that fixed that, okay? So then he says, “Hey man, I was suggested that I come see you, and I know about your work and the whole bit, and I want to do this thing,” and he uses this term, “like Frank Sinatra.” So I took an old man attitude. “Kid, you don’t know nothing about Frank Sinatra.” So this is what he had. [sings] “Some say Atlanta, some say New York.” And I’m waiting for the rest of it. It never came. I’m thinking, “What you want me to do here?” He said, “Well, I thought you could...” And this is the mistake I made. And you guys can really check into this. I completed the song. I did not ask for songwriters. I did not. I didn’t have him in my life at the time, OK? I was just happy to complete something. Not knowing who Outkast was until they sold a billion records? Now, I’m mad as hell. But, it was very interesting and I’m going to expose Mr. Benjamin. There’s no drums on this, just strings, piano, and timpanis and vibes. We get to the studio, I say “Andre, I need you to sing, because this is rubato, I have to conduct this.” He says “Where?” And that was startling to me. It’s like “We’re in a studio man, right here.” He said “I can’t sing in there with those musicians. Those are pro musicians.” “Hey man, what’s wrong with that?” “What’s wrong? I can’t sing with them.” “Andre, this is rubato, I need your vocals to be able to conduct this.” So what we had to do is set up a booth on the side, turn the lights out, for this already superstar, who has been signing in front of millions of people, but punked out in the studio with me. Because most hip-hoppers, per se, never even saw a real live session. It’s mainly control room stuff. But with a room full of musicians... You can’t fight the results, you can’t fight the results. So I was very happy about that piece of music, and I think that’s the intro on the Love Below. So I’m happy with that. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Let’s have a little empathy though, you said you were scared in the studio once before though. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah, but ... I was just scared of Quincy Jones. [laughs] I was very confident about the music, but for somebody that huge, I had never been in his presence other than the meeting. But I finally understood. I did a Snoop Dogg session. And Snoop had never saw that. One rapper I work with, who’s very hip, very musical, and engineer hip. DJ Quik. That’s a bad man, bad man. Jeff Mao Do you have a different approach when it comes to doing a rap record? I mean that Outkast record is obviously kind of an unconventional rap record. Benjamin Wright Jr. I did a big orchestra thing on Quik, you got that? Jeff Mao Yes we do. (music: DJ Quik feat. Mausberg & Raphael Saadiq – “Well”) Benjamin Wright Jr. [comments over music] It’s nasty man. [applause] Jeff Mao So that’s another full orchestra. Full orchestra? Benjamin Wright Jr. Well we had big strings, big strings, and I used flutes. Jeff Mao How many pieces, do you recall? Benjamin Wright Jr. I think on that particular date, we had like ... I think 12? Five, six, and two. 12 violins, five violas, six chellies, and two contrabasses. Two flutes. Jeff Mao Even when things slowed down, did you ever have the urge to do something different, not employ 12 pieces every time? Benjamin Wright Jr. No. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And why not? Benjamin Wright Jr. I’ve missed a lot of gigs, and it’s not an attitude situation. It’s quite insulting for the record company to say, “Well, can you just use 10 guys?” No, I can’t use 10 guys. Call the guy down the street. I can’t do that. Where I’m coming from – until I hired my godson to be in charge, I never had a manager or an agent. All of my work has been my calling card, and God has really blessed me to do a lot of work. When you ask for 10 strings, I can’t give you what you heard, that you want on your project. Now that’s a bold step, because I have 900 children. It’s an economic thing. But you have to stand for something, OK? And I’ve made that decision many, many times. And then you get, “Well you can double them or what ever.” No, no. Those of you who know, you double 10, you don’t get 20. You got double that first 10. And that’s not like 20 players bowing. We can do certain things, even with technology and the whole bit. But when you talk about the live thing, that’s the real thing. For those who are really, let’s say, concerned about the sound, you have to have it. Now, I do a trick with my writing, I do some doubling and the whole bit. I don’t want to expose myself, but I write additional parts. So I can possibly take 20 strings, and with my additional parts or whatever, it might sound like 40, 50 guys. But I like to think that’s my personal trick. Jeff Mao Why have you been so compatible with Justin Timberlake? You’ve worked on all three of his albums. Benjamin Wright Jr. OK. The first album, the record company called me. Justin was new, in terms of solo, so it was like, “We want to make him a Michael Jackson.” So my references were Off the Wall, call that guy. It went very well, OK? Second record, Justin Timberlake calls. OK, I’m honored. I think I did a couple hits on that, OK? So things are slow, Justin is doing movies. LA is slow, nobody is calling Benjamin. I think they’re going in alphabetical order. You know I’m a W, so it takes a while to get to me. I was complaining. “Man, even Justin Timberlake doesn’t love me anymore,” whatever. So I get a call, from Justin’s camp. Cat’s talking fast, like something had happened. “Mr. Wright. Justin Timberlake wants you in the studio this afternoon...” “Hey man, I’m in Detroit.” Sometimes I go out with Earth, Wind, and Fire when they are performing with symphony orchestras. So I go out and conduct. “Oh hey man, I’m tied up.” “Well when you be back sir?” I was like “Well, OK. I’ll be back Monday.” “Well can you come in Monday morning?” “Yes,sir!” So that Monday morning I go to the studio, 9 AM. Bunch of young cats, Justin and Timbaland, the young people, man. So I come in talking smack. “Even Justin Timberlake doesn’t love me anymore, nobody cares about old people.” Young cats are cracking up man. And Justin stepped forward. You know he always had a little hat on, so he took it off. He said, “Mr. Wright, let me see if I got this right.” He said, “You worked on my first album, right?” “Yes.” He said, “You worked on the second album.” “Yes.” He said, “Mr. Wright, this is the third album, and you’re here.” “OK. Fuck it, man. Let’s go to work.” Now, when we started this album, he played some stuff, and I was very intrigued over it. I told a few people, as I begin to write, I say, “I got a feeling that some of the stuff I’m writing might have an impact on the industry.” It did that. Let’s give Justin a hand. [applause] It’s amazing. I’ve been blessed for cats to just trust me, in terms of whatever I feel. As you finish a take with Justin, in terms of my experiences, he’s the boss ... “So, what do you think?” He says, “Mr. Wright, it’s crazy.” I don’t know where he gets this shit from, but it’s cool. I ain’t mad. Jeff Mao This particular album is very ambitious. Your writing really is, in some ways, the bridge between some of the tracks within the tracks. There really are multiple parts to different songs. It’s not so much the three minute pop song format of some of the other recordings. When you put on the album, the first thing you’re gonna hear is this. (music: Justin Timberlake – “Pusher Love Girl”) Benjamin Wright Jr. [comments over music] Yeah. I did that. That’s heavy. Valley, man. Jeff Mao So, how much was your writing integrated into the recording process? Where did you put your parts? Was everything already conceived as this seven-minute piece of music – Benjamin Wright Jr. That intro was not the original intro. I wrote that in the song. When Justin heard that, he says, “No, this is how it’s gotta start.” I ain’t mad, but unfortunately I don’t have the basic rhythm tracks, which were not completed at the time. It was like demos. As usual, I have full range to just do what I hear. Jeff Mao Does anybody have a question for Mr. Wright? Please wait for the microphone. Audience Member Hi. How are you doing? Benjamin Wright Jr. How are you doing? Audience Member Great. Great to meet you, and great to see you. Thank you for being here. Benjamin Wright Jr. Thank you, sir. Audience Member You had mentioned SOLAR at the beginning. If you could, if you have any stories of Leon Sylvers, or working with any of those guys back in the day ... If you were the arranger on Love Is Where You Find It by The Whisperers. Benjamin Wright Jr. I think I did that. Audience Member That’s an incredible album. Benjamin Wright Jr. Wow. OK. Most of the stuff I did for SOLAR, Leon Sylvers was involved. Leon was, still is, an incredible producer. He’s a music man, as well, because most of that stuff, he played bass on. He was another guy who just felt, “Give it to Benjamin.” He has never uttered one word to me in terms of what to do. There was never a question in that day about the budget. Whatever I felt, that was it. The cat is so laid back. I have to feel that he was satisfied with what I was doing, because he’d never comment. It was like, “That’s great, man. That’s great.” That’s it. Now, we hear stories sometimes where producers are going off on their arrangers, “What the hell are you doing?” Thank you Lord, I’ve never had that. I’ve never had to change anything on a session. The Lord looks out for me. Audience Member Right on, man. Thank you. Benjamin Wright Jr. Thank you. Jeff Mao Anyone else with a question? [applause] Audience Member Thank you very much for being here. You talk a lot about being blessed with people coming to you, and I just wondered if there was anyone that you had ever chased to work with, that you had in your sights. Benjamin Wright Jr. There’s a cat standing back there on the wall, a very distinguished gentleman. I think he has a Justin Timberlake suit and tie on. Could you stand up? OK. He does heavy duty stuff. I am hoping maybe you can help influence him. I wish to submit an application to work with him. I’m trying to get my little resume together. He lives approximately 20 blocks from my house. I don’t wish to use email or anything like that. I’m gonna take my shit over to his house. You guys look out for me. Put a word in for me before you leave. OK. Thank you so much. [laughter / applause] Audience Member Hello. Thank you very much for your lecture. I’ve been wondering a lot, because I am a DJ, so I’ve been wondering a lot what was your perception of the work of people like Walter Gibbons, or Larry Levan, who were essentially taking out arrangements, and stretching out the rhythm parts in the disco music ... You would somehow ended up doing the arrangement, and they were taking it out. What was your perception of this process in those days? Benjamin Wright Jr. We hated you. [laughs] They created a whole other world for you, and they call it “remix.” It’s like, “What the hell is a remix? We’ve already done this stuff.” I have two sons that are DJs. One kinda backed off, because he has a wife and kids now, and one is still going all over the world. He performs with a group called Next. He had done a mixtape. I’m old school. Mixtape. “Hey dad, check out my mixtape.” “OK. Yeah.” Finished it, and I said, “Son, you got about six songs in this mixtape that I did. How am I gonna get paid?” Cats create their own world with that. I’m not mad, because like I said, I have two sons who are DJs, so I understand, and I encourage them. But y’all did take the work away from us. No, man. Keep doing what you’re doing. [applause] Yes, sir? Audience Member We’re out here, we had Dave Smith here yesterday, and we’re in Japan, land of Roland, how has MIDI impacted your life? What happened when it dropped, and how has it created an ease in your workflow, because of your ability to kind of omit the copyist, so to speak? Benjamin Wright Jr. OK. You hit on something very heavy. This afternoon, I walked into this wonderful place called Red Bull ... Jeff Mao Music Academy. Benjamin Wright Jr. Music Academy. [laughs] And they made me feel this small, man. I was like, “What’s up?” Where is he? Where is he? One of the gentlemen that worked with me today, says, “I haven’t dealt with MIDI for 15 years.” I felt so small, man. However, since I’m 70 years old, when MIDI came out... I think you’ve witnessed one of the guys with sequential circuits, and whatever was the beginning of MIDI ... Now, I know MIDI from a standpoint of Yamaha. I think he worked with Yamaha. Back in the day, the Roland situation... I’m gonna drop a name that nobody mentions that started in LA, Tom Beckman started Roland. All these other names came later. Roland had DCB, which was I think the Juno-6, that could only speak to one other instrument. Out, in, and then stop right there. Then, immediately after that, Yamaha came with MIDI. It was a savior for me, as an arranger. Today, my studio is set up with tons of outboard MIDI stuff. So, when I go to write, I turn on everything, and my strings, everything is just laid out. When I got to Red Bull today, they said, “Mr. Wright, you’re so nostalgic. Everything is in the computer. You don’t have to deal with MIDI, you can just go audio.” That’s fine. I’ve got the Mac, Logic 10, Pro Tools 11 – I got all of that, but I do have two-inch machines, thank you. I got all the latest stuff, but I’m most comfortable with the older stuff. Now, in terms of Logic, I was a Logic endorser from way back. Sibelius, when it came out, I think I was one of the first endorsers. I know this stuff. I’ll even go further back, New England Digital, the Synclav, I was one of those musicians that were picking their brains. A lot of us didn’t know what was happening, how the engineers were really using us to put that stuff together, and the whole bit. I go back to the early days, the inception of all of the synths. I know them, and I still have a lot of them. In terms of how MIDI dealt with the copyist... We had MIDI a long time before we had workable notation software. Some of the early stuff was... Jim Miller Personal Composer. It never really worked. Jim didn’t have the bank to keep developing. He passed away. God bless him. A lot of cats don’t know, even today, that Logic is a tremendous notation software, and that’s what I use. I have Finale, I have Sibelius, and the new stuff that PreSonus is dealing with. I’ve got all that stuff. My preference is still the old Logic. It hurt a lot of cats, in terms of copying, especially now. It took quite a few years for it to halfway come together, because the notation software – all of it – still speaks more of a machine language. You have to be some kind of musician to go in and edit it for the player. It can fool you. It sounds right, but it doesn’t look right. You have to go in and edit it for the players. Please edit it for the players. If not, the session is gonna kick your butt time-wise. You had a question? Audience Member Check, check. Yes? So, obviously you’re talking about how you’re filling in the missing pieces for a song the producer already wrote, and that you’re writing the string parts, and whatever parts that are missing. You’re talking about being blessed that you never had to change anything after that, which is great, but I was thinking ... Do you ever have the feeling that something else in a song needed to change for you to do your job correctly? Benjamin Wright Jr. Well, yes. You have to be very tactful about that. You can’t let the boss know he’s jacking up. Sometimes, I will make a suggestion, “Hey man, check out so-and-so.” A lot of times you would get something... It may be a C bass note in the piano part, but you go through some of the other rhythm parts, and they’re playing a D there, and it’s a clash. So, I have to say, “Hey man, what do you want?” Sometimes, I get, “Damn, you hear everything.” “Yes. I have to take it apart.” In those kinds of situations, I get a clarification. So, I’m being slick too, because I’m pointing out that something is suspect. I have to do that, because once you take it, then everything is your fault. So, I’m very careful. I take every bar – every bar, there has to be a clarification, because now I’m about to roll. I don’t need to be stopping myself to try to figure out what this is. It’s not negative, it’s just getting a clarification. Audience Member Thank you. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yes, sir? Audience Member Thank you very much. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yes. Audience Member Out of curiosity, did you work with The Brothers Johnson? Benjamin Wright Jr. I never worked with The Brothers Johnson. I worked with Louis [E. Johnson]. Louis is a giant. My best friend, Wayne Vaughn, who wrote “Let’s Groove Tonight,” was the keyboardist with The Brothers Johnson. The funny thing about it, Wayne is a jazz pianist. I’d be like, “How in the hell did you write ‘Let’s Groove Tonight,’ man? There ain’t no jazz in that.” With The Brothers Johnson, they weren’t playing no jazz, they were funking. Everything they did was funk. If I picked up the record, I’d have to put something over my nose, there’s so much funk in it... But, Louis is a giant. Louis is a giant. Anybody else? Yes? Jeff Mao Let’s pass the mic, please. Benjamin Wright Jr. No, don’t give the mic to him. [laughs] Audience Member Thank you very much for being here, Mr. Wright. Benjamin Wright Jr. Yeah. Audience Member I’m thankful for that. I have a couple of questions. First is, you growing up in the delta of Mississippi. Listen to some records, you know, Robert Jones, Son House, stuff, and your original was so colorful, when the bluesy anatomic music – how has blues influenced your music? That’s my question, how it worked for you in that way, and the other question is how was working with DJ Quik? Benjamin Wright Jr. Being from where I’m from, I was to aware as a kid, around the blues and whatever, how I was hearing things. It wasn’t along the line of blues, even though I stand up and say hey man, I know blues, okay, I really know blues, shuffles and the whole bit. I know blues. Okay. But being in the high school band exposed me to other kind of stuff. I was singing in the choir at school too, because that was my thing, a singer. And the choir director took us to Tougaloo College to see a performance of “The Messiah.” We didn’t have TV and whatever. So I went to see this “Messiah,” and it was a full orchestra, and I was like wow. And that was one of the things that helped change my life, that full orchestra. I was just totally mesmerized. I was in the choir, and that led me to join the band. I end up playing in “The Messiah,” I was a timpani player. Before I answer the other question let me tell you about “The Messiah.” I have to roll forward 30 or 40 years. There’s a big church in LA called Faithful Central. Big black church that took over the LA Forum where the Lakers used to play ball. Big church. They called me in to do their Easter program. So I come in with a 60 piece orchestra and they hit me, first year, with “The Messiah.” It’s like, I ain’t going to write that. Order the score. They ordered the score. “The Messiah” is basically for a chamber orchestra. George Frederick Handel. They bring the score, I think, whoa, we’ve got problems here. That score is in Italian. I ain’t speak no Italian. Some of the instruments have got Italian names. But from a technical standpoint, all the trumpets is written for D trumpets. You know anybody got a D trumpet? Ain’t nobody got no more D trumpets. Back in that day, trumpets didn’t have valves, they made trumpets in the key of whatever, OK? So that’s my first problem – D trumpets. All of the trombone parts are written in tenor clef. If there are any trombone players in here you know you play mainly from bass clef. Especially something fast! It’s tenor clef, it’s a moveable clef. Think, who in the hell is going to play this? OK, problem number two. The french horn part in “The Messiah,” the original thing, has no key signature. I think, ‘I ain’t writing this!’ I end up having to basically transpose certain instruments, put the trombone parts in bass clef. It’s easy to create the key signature for the french horns and the whole. So, excuse the expression, “Messiah” kicked my ass! It was much more work than what I wanted to deal with, but most people don’t have to deal with that, you know what I’m saying? And then I had to do it for a full orchestra, and it’s not written for full orchestra, OK? DJ Quik. The term quicks mean fast anyway, you know what I’m saying? DJ Quik was a delight, because he’s a music person. He’s one of the rappers that don’t use live music, you know? I know he does the other stuff too, but he actually uses guitar, bass, drums, keyboards. And he’s good, he’s very good, I applaud him. Any more questions? Yes ma’am? OK, wait a minute, say that on the mic I need to hear – Audience Member I said it’s such an honor and it’s so great to hear you speak, so – Benjamin Wright Jr. Thank you. Audience Member Thank you for being here. You’ve said that ... I mean it’s obvious that you love your work and love what you’ve done and I think that’s really great to see because a lot of artists are self-loathing and always questioning their stuff and their work, and never happy with anything. I was wondering if you were always that way or that was something that you had to develop, or was there a turning point where you were like, yeah I really like this stuff that I’ve done. Or is that just your personality? Benjamin Wright Jr. Why you go font me off like that? OK. I love what I do. It’s not a job because I love it, OK. It’s the creative process. The thing that has happened to me over the years is that it’s a business, and I never looked at it that way. It’s what I wanted to do and I just think it’s magic somebody gives you something that’s so raw and you put all this stuff in it, and you hear it coming over the radio, it’s like, I would have done that, oh. Wait a minute I did that! It’s a joy... I’m still having fun. Please forgive me I have to just say it again, I’m damned near 100 years old and I’m still having fun. I enjoy the music, I enjoy being creative and I get a piece of music and I just can’t [inaudible] from my mind because sometimes you say, “Mr Wright, could you just shut up.” Because it’s like, ‘Yeah, man I could do this or I could do that yeah, yeah, yeah and I... yeah, yeah.” So I’m still a baby. I love what I do, and most of the music ... wait a minute I got a couple cats in here who – I recently participated in something for the queen, Miss Aretha Franklin, I used to be her music director as well. And, it’s not that I disagreed but one particular artist was producing something and I just felt that it wasn’t her. But my work was good. I like it. I don’t know how everybody feels about it and that record is yet to come out. So, sometimes those things happen but I got to tell you, I can’t give you in an itemized list of things that I didn’t like. I’m happy with the music. I still love the music. Jeff “Chairman” Mao I have a question for you. Do you... over here on the couch – Benjamin Wright Jr. What couch? Jeff “Chairman” Mao So you had some, you enjoyed some – Benjamin Wright Jr. We got history in New York so, hey, no problem. Jeff “Chairman” Mao True, true indeed. So you have a little history of songwriting, which we actually didn’t talk about, but did you ... I can play the song, but I wanted to ask you, did you have ambition to continue songwriting and not just composition and arranging? Because you enjoyed a little bit of success you could say, with that song? Benjamin Wright Jr. I know what you’re talking about. Here’s the thing. I never aspired to be a songwriter. The thing is, there were things that I would be producing and not feel comfortable with the songs and you say, “Hey, send me some songs, send me some songs.” Songs, songs, songs and... they all come, whack. So, time is running out, you say well I’ve got to write something. And that forced me to write certain songs. Now, I think the song you might have... why don’t you play it and we’ll see. (music: Quincy Jones & James Ingram – “One Hundred Ways”) Benjamin Wright Jr. [comments over music] It’s paying my rent today thank you. This is dedicated to all of the ladies in the house. Can I talk? Let me give you a little story. I’m not going to take up much of your time. I was producing an act for Arista Records called Chuck Cissel. Nobody remembers Chuck any more. So, the new Vice President of Arista Records was a guy called Larkin Arnold, came over from Capitol Records. I had to bring in these songs, he wanted these songs for this album. So two songwriting partners of mine a cat named Tony Coleman, young cat who always stressed that he wanted to write, and Cathy Wakefield, an old veteran. “Cathy, this cat is very talented.” “OK, Benjamin, bring him.” So we stayed up all night long to prepare four songs or this meeting. About 5, 6 AM. I put the vocals down for this. I felt very good about it. Drove to Century City in LA for the meeting at 10 AM, speed up, no problem. The Vice President, who was my friend, listened, finally our fourth song, and this is what he said – I don’t want to be censored here because I’m just quoting. “What the fuck is this?” And I’m like, these are the songs. He said to me, “This is some bullshit.” Wow. Wait a minute, we worked all night long to prepare this, you can’t say this is some bullshit. I felt like an escargot, I could have just crawled right under the door. I think I did. I drove home, just hurt. When I got home, the phone rang. It was a very familiar voice. “Hey Benjamin, this is Quincy Jones.” “Hey, man, what’s happening?” “I’m producing George Benson, and I’ve been through 400 songs, and I don’t hear anything, you got anything man?” What I just went through? “No. I got nothing.” “Man, I know you’ve got something.” After a little probing, I say, “OK, I’ve got a song I’m going to bring over to you. I took the song to Q’s house. Peggy comes out and sayd, “Oh, come on Benjamin...” I said, “No, no, no, no, just give him this.” [pretends to hold a CD] I didn’t want to hear no reaction or whatever because I just got beat up. I go home, two or three hours later there’s message on the answering machine. “Benjamin” – I’m quoting – “this is a motherfucker!” Wow. Q must be tripping. He’s got somebody else’s tape and thinks that’s the one I brought. But it was the right one. So, Quincy Jones got the song on George Benson for the album Give me the Night. Hey, I’m happy, because George is selling platinum. I know I’m going to make some money. But just before the album was to come out, Q calls and says, “Hey man, we’ve got to take it off George’s album. But I’m going to put it on my album. Quincy Jones album.” “Quincy you ain’t going to sell no records. All your jazz stuff, come on man. I’m going to make some money with George.” No, weren’t hearing it. So I took a negative attitude about it. “I’ll give it to somebody else.” Nobody else heard it. Nobody wanted to touch it. I finally just gave up, okay, whatever. Well, it was put on Quincy Jones’ album. Not to get into the mechanics of it, but this was a throwaway album because Quincy owed A&M an album. When Quincy’s album came out, first tune [sings]. Flop. Second song [sings]. Flop. Third single [sings]. Wow, what a song! Yeah. Just killed the charts. The phone rings. “Benjamin, you got the next single, man.” Yeah, OK. I wasn’t enthusiastic at all. This is what happened. Quincy’s album, The Dude, was number 122 on the Billboard charts. “Find One Hundred Ways” dropped, and in two weeks Quincy’s album was number two. Thank you very much. [applause] That was in ‘79, I believe. And ladies and gentleman I am so proud to say that in the year 2014 the checks are still coming in! [laughs] Thank you. Jeff “Chairman” Mao But no more songwriting? Benjamin Wright Jr. Well, you know what, I would love to do more songwriting but what had happened to me, I got so busy with arranging jobs it took me away from songwriting. But now that I’m old an unemployed, I’m going to be writing songs every day.

---

Title: Addison Groove
Date: 2015-04-19
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/addison-groove-lecture

Addison Groove
Tony Williams started his recording career at the deeper end of dubstep as Headhunter. Increasingly, though, he moved towards the name Addison Groove, his freer, looser, juke-fuelled pseudonym. With a background in jungle and hardcore, he believes tracks should be banged out in a matter of hours (with a few more later for mixdowns).
In this talk at the 2011 Red Bull Music Academy, he traces his history from old Fantazia tape packs through dubstep’s inspirational early days up to his obsession with Chicago footwork and his new love of Angola’s ’70 sounds.
Hosted by Emma Warren Welcome to today’s first lecture. Some of you may have seen Tony, aka Addison
Groove, doing his thing last night. If you did, you’re gonna have some idea of
who he is and what he does. If you didn’t, certainly by the end of this
session you should. Addison Groove I hope so. Emma Warren So welcome, Addison Groove. Addison Groove Hi. [applause] Emma Warren Now, over the next hour and a half or so we’re gonna be talking about loads of
stuff to do with you as an artist. We’re gonna be talking about your
relationship with juke music. We’re gonna be talking about the early days of
dubstep and we’re gonna be talking about the music you’re making now. But first of all, we
had a conversation yesterday, as it happens at the Academy, in the kitchen,
eating food. And I thought it might be a really nice place to start, and
that’s you aged seven with your ZX Spectrum +2. This is important, isn’t it? Addison Groove I was saying to someone yesterday that when I was about five I had a Spectrum.
There was a war between Spectrum and
Commodore, but I had a Spectrum,
I was in the Spectrum camp. But I read the manual and it taught you how to
make music using beeps and – what’s the operating system on a Spectrum? [to
participant] What was it? No, it wasn’t. Anyway, it was with the operating
system and when you turned it on, the operating system came up and you could
select “load a tape” or you could go within the operating system and programme
it to make beeps. I was learning from this book, aged about seven or eight, to
programme these beeps that made a noise. It took about two hours just to play
about five seconds. But I was fascinated by these beeps and knew that I wanted
to make beepy music. Emma Warren From the beginning you knew you wanted to make beepy music. Addison Groove I was fascinated by it, yeah. Emma Warren There’s certainly something, when you speak to people who make music, they
often tell you similar stories, that, “Right from the very beginning, as far
back as I can remember, I wanted to make beepy music.” There’s definitely
something in an artist that shows itself pretty early as far as wanting to
interact with technology and also, most importantly, wanting to make it do
what you want it to do. Addison Groove It was weird because I didn’t realize until recently that that was something I was
doing, I was making this music. Now I think about it, yeah, I was programming
the computer, just like I am now, just in a different way. So you’re into the
technology but you’re also into making a noise, so yeah, it’s great. Emma Warren Talking of making a noise, it’s really good at the beginning of these sessions
to have our guest play something, so we get a real sense straight away of
something that they do. Just like you guys did the other day when you sat
there and played your 1:59 of your music. I think we could possibly do with
more than 1:59, so do you want to give us a taste of something? Addison Groove This track is only three minutes. No one would have heard it before so I might
as well play it. Emma Warren Exclusive. Addison Groove Let me talk about that little buzzing noise there. When you use
Logic in Ableton. In
ReWire, I mean, when you bounce a
track, for some reason it has this crazy little buzzing noise just before you
record. I haven’t gone back in and edited yet. (music: Addison Groove – “Rude Boy” / applause) Emma Warren Are you able to tell us what that is? Addison Groove I made it ages ago when I was getting into more bongo-driven music. This
particular track reminds me of jungle in a way, just because of the vocal. I
remember when I was younger I would go to drum & bass raves but I was really
into jungle from a young age. They would have these voices and pads and stuff
and it reminds me of that. But I like the bongo element as well, it’s kind of
off-key. It’s really hard to DJ with this track, I don’t play it in clubs, but
it’s good for a B-side or something like that. Emma Warren Does it have a name? Addison Groove Not really. It’s called “Rude Boy,” which is kind of obvious. But yeah, that’s
probably what it’s gonna be. Emma Warren But is it an Addison Groove track? Addison Groove Completely. Emma Warren So you talked about getting into more bongo-driven music. Can you expand on
that a tiny bit? What do you mean by that? Addison Groove What got me into percussive music as such was juke. When I started listening
to juke I was amazed at what little use they made of the sounds and how super-
percussive it could be with just little elements. Like that track I just
played, you’ve got a kick drum and a bongo just working together, even at an
offbeat. From listening to juke I was learning about percussion, which got me
into African music. Then I was listening to all this stuff from Africa and my
current stuff is definitely going that way. Emma Warren Now, I’m gonna ask you in a minute about this new interest you’ve got in
Angolan music, music from the ’60s and ’70s of certain parts of Africa. But
before we go there, we need to stick with your relationship with juke. You
were one of the first. I know lots of people were listening to it, but you
were one of the first people to bring it to a broader audience through
“Footcrab.” It would be nice to
know a bit about that, but what’s your current relationship with juke artists
themselves? Addison Groove I’m good friends with Spinn and Rashad. They’ve toured the UK twice now and I was able to book Rashad when
he came to London maybe six, seven months ago. That was the first time I met him,
I’d had a few emails before. They’re really nice guys and they have a respect
for me, which is really nice. When Rashad played in London he played a remix
of “Footcrab” that he did. I didn’t even give him the parts for this. He
took the track and just done something with it. I was amazed that they’d given me
this appreciation. “We did that for you. Part of the reason we’re out here is
’cause you were pushing our stuff.” It’s true, I was pushing the juke stuff.
When I was getting booked to play dubstep, I was playing the really deep stuff.
When I was heard juke, I’d try and get it into my sets, I’d play 10 minutes at
the start of juke, then go into dubstep ’cause I thought no one’s gonna get
it. Gradually, I’d put 20 minutes in and see how much I could get away with. I
made the “Footcrab” track and anyone who’d seen me DJ prior to that would’ve
had a little idea that’s what I wanted to play. Emma Warren It’s interesting, isn’t it, that process of getting the crowd to understand what you
want to do. There was definitely a period in dubstep when people were playing
jungle records at the end of sets. And I guess you were doing something
different, you were playing the different stuff, the future rather than the
past, at the beginning, before moving into stuff people knew better. Addison Groove Yeah, I just believed in the music. I thought it was really good. I do like
simple music usually and no one I knew of was really playing it on this side
of the country. There must have been people playing it, people buying it, but
I had the ability to use my Headhunter name to play to a lot of people. One weekend I’d be playing to 200, the next
500, 600, 700 people. If 10 percent of the crowd enjoyed the music, then I’ve done
something I believed in. Emma Warren Traditionally in Chicago, dating back to the ’80s, a lot of people were very
nervous about European people coming and taking their music, particularly English
people. A lot of the acid house artists – and you’ll be hearing more about that
this afternoon – had problems with their music being stolen. Do you think
coming in as an artist people treated you differently, or did you encounter
any reticence because there’s this historic knowledge of what happens when you
let the music get taken away from the city? Addison Groove No, I never felt any bad vibes. There’s some things I read online about
myself, “Oh, he’s stealing music from Chicago, etc., etc.” Well, who hasn’t used a 909 kick drum? All I tried to
do was expand it and I had the ability to do that. I knew I could play to these
crowds and push new music on them. Even when I made my tracks as Headhunter I
didn’t make direct dubstep, I always wanted to put a little twist on it. I was
often put in the same bracket as
2562, even people from
Bristol like Peverelist, Pinch. Some people
are like, “Yeah, it’s techno-dubstep.” Alright, maybe it is, but it’s not the same
style as what was coming out of London. Emma Warren You just said, “Who hasn’t used a 909 kick?” The thing is as
part of the creative process, how do you take something that’s not yours?
You’re not from Chicago, you’re not from the projects, but you’ve taken the
music and made it yours. Other people from all around the world have made
music brilliantly, but it’s not their music that they’ve made. How do you take
something that’s an established scene and make it your own? Addison Groove The first thing was to not copy juke. I didn’t wanna sit in my studio and go,
“Right, 160 BPM. Let’s play a juke track that can get played in Chicago.” I
can’t relate to that, I have no history with that. What I wanted to do with
“Footcrab”… it was an accident, a good experiment. My experiment was, “Let’s
make this juke-style music at dubstep speed.” One of the reasons I made it, I
was doing this juke stuff, I never had anything to go from dubstep to juke, so
I thought I’m gonna make this kind of dubstep-tempo juke. So I made the track for
that. The first time I played it, it got no reaction so I thought, “Oh well,
that’s another one that doesn’t get spoken of.” Then I gave the track to
Pinch and Peverelist and those guys were, “This is the best tune you’ve ever
made.” “Really? OK.” Then they started playing it, then it caught on and all I
was trying to do was just experiment, slow it down, take juke elements and use it in dubstep so
I could play it in my sets. That was it. Emma Warren Shall we have a little listen and you can tell us something about what you did
with it. Addison Groove What, “Footcrab”? Emma Warren Yeah. Or if you don’t want to play that, then it might be nice to play a juke thing and then something juke-inspired so you can show us what you did with it. Addison Groove OK, so I’ll play something by myself first. This track came out on Swamp
81 back in March, I think, it’s called “Sexual.” (music: Addison Groove – “Sexual” / applause) Thanks. In that track you can hear the bass go boom, boom, boom. I wanted to
make a track like boom, boom, boom. Then the half-time snare was kind of
from ghettotech because juke is
essentially ghettotech music. So you’ve got a half on there, on the fifth and
the 13th on the 808. So it’s
doing a 2-step thing. It’s got a vocal sample taken from a scratch record and
a lot of the ghetto music was maybe old funk breaks that later went onto
scratch records. I’ve got a lot of scratch records and it’s just full of
samples, the greatest samples, stabs, and those samples you don’t find on CDs
that everyone uses. You just try and think, “What have I got in my studio that I can use?” So I used that for the vocal. The pad, well, a lot of the juke stuff I
like to play was very melodic so I wanted to make something with a melody.
This track is at 145, so it was a good tempo, to go from something 135-140 up to
something that’s 155. There are some juke tracks around that are 155 and the
pad is taken from… I played it and it’s sidechained. I went onto Amazon and
searched for saxophone music. I just wanted to search for music that only had
saxophones in it, no drums, so I’m looking for samples in weird places, not
sample CDs. It was a saxophone track that happened to have a
Rhodes and I just found this little
[makes noise] made the melody. There’s really not that much to it. All the
percussion is 808. This track was made a week or two after I made “Footcrab,”
which was in 2010. You listen to some of my stuff now and I think it’s better produced, and it’s a bit different, less elements and stuff. But this was me having all these ideas in my head about what I
could do with this music. “Footcrab” came out; on the flip of that track was a tune called “Work It” and to
follow that was a bunch of other tracks. I had so many ideas in my head that I
didn’t think were out there. So it was, “Let’s do this, let’s see how far I
can take it.” My Addison Groove thing, I’m playing so many more shows than I
did as Headhunter and I’m enjoying it so much more ‘cause I can play so much
different music in my sets. Like last night when I DJed, I started at about 135, I
went down to 110 BPM by playing some moombahton and within the space of half an
hour I was mixing up to 180. I love doing that, I love the variation, people
guessing what I’m gonna do, and it keeps me interested as well. If the crowd
can follow me I’m happy. Emma Warren You mentioned just a second ago the 808. We should talk about this for a
minute. This is yours, isn’t it? Addison Groove Yeah. Emma Warren I read you saying somewhere it was a choice between a new car, ’cause your car
was sounding like a tank… Addison Groove It was. Emma Warren Or an 808. And you clearly chose to go with the tank for a while. Addison Groove My car’s alright now, I managed to get a nice one. My agent was like, “I think you
should start playing some live shows. There’s people asking if you can play
live.” OK, I’ve never done that before, never fully played onstage with
one of these. So I agreed on three gigs before I even bought this. Emma Warren That’s a commitment, isn’t it? Sometimes you have to say you’ll do something
you’re not quite ready to do in order to force yourself to get ready for it. By the way, how long did you give yourself? Addison Groove Two weeks. Emma Warren That’s a seat-of-the-pants one. Addison Groove It was hard to find as well. I took gigs in Finland, Fabric and Berghain. Those are the places you should go as an experienced musician, really. So I was,
“Right, I’ve got to locate a drum machine.” And I needed one with MIDI on – if
you notice, this one has been modified. It’s got three MIDI ports on and that
was essential ‘cause I wanted it to work with Ableton to keep in time, so I
could put loops on top of it. Found one, went to look at it in London, it turned out not to work. I
went all the way to London to pick this one up, got to this guy’s house and it
didn’t switch on. Hmm, OK. Just about to leave London two days later and I
emailed this guy on eBay and he lived in Croydon, didn’t hear back from him and I was driving home
on the motorway, in my tank, and he called me and said, “You can come and have
a look at this drum machine.” So I looked at it, it’s in amazing condition. It was quite expensive, but I knew I needed this drum machine. The gigs that followed,
the one in Finland was okay – it was a bit, “Hmm, he’s obviously learning how to do this.” Then I went to Fabric and I did a good job, I think. I really
enjoyed myself and it was great. Main room Fabric, first time doing that. I guess
you were all on that lecture yesterday when the guy from Funktion One
was talking. One of the great things about this is this plugs into a
mixer, it goes straight into a PA. It doesn’t go through a DJ mixer, so when
you play the bass drum on this it does kick ass. Emma Warren Do you wanna show us what you’ve been doing with it live then? Addison Groove Yeah. The set-up now is not the best, but I can explain how it works. The
drum machine has ten outputs and it has individual outputs on the back. Each
output goes into a different channel on the mixer, so that gives me volume
control over each one, even though there’s volume control on here. I can EQ
it and stuff. When I play live I also use an effects box. This isn’t my
effects box, it’s one I’ve stolen from a room. I don’t know quite how it
works, but it’s got presets so it should sound OK. I set that up on the
auxiliary channels. I don’t have to play the drum machine from the start-stop
button. I’ve actually got this Doepfer box
that converts a MIDI signal into a DIN sync signal. This MIDI on the side, I
don’t need this anymore, I could’ve just bought one with DIN sync on. So it
converts the signal, I can set it to Ableton 125 BPM, press play, I see lights
going. Then I can choose the sound, a snare, I know snare drums are on number
two so I should hear a snare. [snare starts] Then the auxiliaries, there’s a
delay. I haven’t gone through this effects unit yet. So that’s a snare, then I
can bring a bass drum in. [bass drum come in] Then you’ve got a hat. Hmm,
that’s why you do a soundcheck ’cause sometimes things aren’t working. Emma Warren Hey, hey, as you’ve already explained to us you are someone who likes to do things on
the fly and you appreciate that a mistake can be a happy part of the creative
process. Addison Groove That’s right. That’s the tom of the 808. Now the problem with the 808 is the
bass drum doesn’t have any pitch, so you’re at a loose end now. Stop this.
[turns beat off] When I play live I like to sample and put it into the 808
and put it into Ableton, it sounds much better, I can have pitch on it. So
when I play live I do some sampled 808 parts with my MIDI controller and then
I just play the drum machine ‘cause I’ve got more variation on the bass drum.
But I’ll play this bass drum for now. (music: Roland TR-808 drum machine demonstration) So hopefully there’s
enough effect on the tom. [_music stops] Kind of endless. I have the
drum machine doing that stuff and I also have samples in Ableton, which I
didn’t play just then but I’ll give you an example of a sample. [music
continues / applause] I get carried away. This is what I do at home sometimes. What can I
do today? I’m just going to plug my 808 into my synthesizer, ‘cause this has
got Gate/CV on, so if you have a
synthesizer that doesn’t have MIDI, you can get the 808 to trigger it via the
accent or the cowbell. You don’t even have to have the cowbell turned up on
volume to do it. Or maybe you do, I can’t remember. But you can essentially
sequence a non-MIDI instrument with this and it’s very good fun, you just get a
bit lost. But if you’ve got an effects box like this set up properly – this
one’s not set up great – you can just get carried away. The unfortunate thing
about doing everything in analog is at the time you’re really into it. But
play it against something that’s nicely mastered and engineered with a
computer and it doesn’t sound as strong as that. Unless you’ve got the best converters
and you’re recording it all in. I find it quite difficult to do everything in
analog. I work really fast, I probably make two tracks in a day, take about
two to three hours per track. So I don’t like to spend too long. If I spend
longer than four hours on a track then I scrap it ‘cause I’ve kind of lost the
vibe on a track. I like to get things done really quickly. Emma Warren You’ve cracked the idea of accepting stuff can never be finished and you just
know when it’s done, that’s enough. Addison Groove I feel I make two types of tunes. One is where I want to make a track to play
on Friday; I want to go to this club and I can make something that I want it to have a rewind or I want
it be something that just flows. Or I’ve had enough of a club, it’s a Monday
or Tuesday, and I make something like that first track I played that’s just an
experiment, nice. You don’t wanna make club music, you just wanna make
something weird but groovy. Emma Warren Now, a lot of you guys will understand the similarities and differences
between DJing and playing live. But for you, what’s been the most interesting
thing about opening yourself up to performing rather than just DJing? Addison Groove The first thing is the whole set is my own stuff. Sometimes when I play live I do
chuck in the odd, another track. It depends on the crowd. If I turn up to a club and
the crowd are young, most of them don’t know who’s on the line-up, they’re
just there to have a party, then I’ll chuck in a few tracks that are not my
own, just to get the party going. Emma Warren Like what? What are your party-starting tracks? Addison Groove A track I played last night by
Dexter, called
“Space Booty.” It came out maybe
six months ago. I love this track, it fits really well with everything else,
kind of 2-step-y track. What else? Anything by
Boddika always seems to
work. I try to find stuff that fits with mine quite well. So Boddika stuff
does, Dexter stuff does. Not really any of the juke stuff ‘cause I don’t have
anything at 160 really, so I try not to play that stuff. However the last six months
I’ve been playing the Rashad mix of
“Footcrab,” ‘cause it’s great. Emma Warren I know some artists like to collaborate and you tend to just be making your
tracks. But what about collaborations, in the sense of having compatible
people to work with? I guess I’m thinking of the relationships you’ve got with people like Loefah or Martyn,
working with them to make music for their labels. Addison Groove Anything that was signed to a label was never made for the label. I’m good
friends with Martyn and I would sort him out with tracks. We were just talking one day he was like, “I’d love to do a release. Some of these tracks you’ve got,
they’re not gonna come out. So if you wanna put them out, by all means.” So I
never specifically make a track for a label. But if there’s an interest, then
OK, let’'s do that. When Loefah put “Footcrab” out on Swamp it was quite a good
fit. He wanted the label to go in this direction and it set things off for his
label, which was great. It was definitely a good home for it.
Nowadays, I’m not pitching my music to any label, I just like to make my
own music. If there’s an interest from someone who appreciates my music and
can help it do good things, then I’m all for it. Emma Warren I’d like to ask you now about the Headhunter stuff. Because you were there
right in the early days of dubstep, when things were starting to become
slightly bigger, ’05-’06 era. Addison Groove I remember it. Dubstep was a kind of accident because I live in Bristol and around
2005 a friend of mine called Pod came to me and said we’d been offered a radio show. I hadn’t DJed since I
was about 20, 19, four years. “OK, cool, let’s do it.” Then we played
something cool and I thought, “What do I enjoy that I can play that’s fresh,
UK-based music?” And it was grime. So I started playing some grime. A lot of
the stuff I was playing I was thinking, “I like it, but I think I could make
something similar that would fit more me.” So I started making some tracks and it
turned out I was making dubstep, I wasn’t making grime at all. The person who
told me that was Pinch, ‘cause I got it him to come over. He was, “Wow, this is really cool. He’s playing this crazy music, I’ve never heard that before.” From that I started to make
dubstep and then learn about
Skream, Loefah, Mala, etc. In the space of six months, from me going, “Right, I’m gonna
make this dubstep stuff,” I was signed to Tempa. Emma Warren Tempa at that point was the preeminent label, affiliated with
Rinse and FWD>>. That was
the only place to be if you wanted to have a dubstep release. Addison Groove At the time I was living with Tech Itch and Jakes. I was living with those guys for
two years. I was making the dubstep stuff and I made this one track, “7th
Curse,” and I gave it to
N-Type. That track came
out on a label that me and Tech Itch set up. N-Type went to London, to
FWD>>, played it. Sarah from Rinse and Tempa, she was like, “What is
this track?” Got my phone number, I think she rang me when I was playing
paintball. I got this weird… Emma Warren So you’re playing paintball? Addison Groove I remember it being something like that. “You want me to do what?” I just
stopped playing paintball. This is wicked. I’ve got to arrange a bus to London
‘cause I was skint at the time. Emma Warren But this is the thing, because at that point all the artists making dubstep
were pretty much fresh to the whole thing. There were some people that carried
on the stuff that influenced dubstep, like Zed Bias. But those people were
in the minority. The vast majority of people making those early dubstep records, this was
the first time they’d really done anything. Addison Groove Yeah, everyone making dubstep, it was as if they were making music for the
first time. Obviously, some were older than others. Someone like Skream, he’s 16 and he’s
making massive tracks. “What is this? This kid’s crazy.” So everyone was new
to it and that fed into going to play shows. It was you kind of go, “I’ll play a show for you
but I’ll have to stay on your sofa ‘cause I’ve never been to Birmingham
before?” Something like that. You kind of start touring around, seeing all these places, not
making that much money but you’re enjoying it because you love it. Emma Warren You spent a year living without a fixed address, not “street homeless,” but
you decided you’d spend a year not living anywhere in particular, but touring
the world, staying on people’s sofas and sofa surfing. Addison Groove I was fed up with living in Bristol, not happy in the houses where I was
staying. I just thought, “Oh fuck this, I can go and live around the world.” I
can look at my schedule and I had a couple of gigs in Europe and I had
Australia coming up and America coming up. I figured I could probably stretch
this out for a year and tour around. I kinda made an album on the road. So I’d be in
Paris and I’d start a track and the next day I’m somewhere else. An album came
out of it called Nomad, which came out in 2008. I remember when that album came out,
that’s when I started to get into juke. Right at the tail-end of 2008, 2009
I started hearing glimpses of this juke stuff, the ghettotech version of it.
It was an interesting time for everyone involved in dubstep. They’d come from
nothing. They didn’t jump on any bandwagon ‘cause there was no bandwagon to
jump on, it was just pure fresh vibes. That’s why I liked the juke stuff so much, it reminded
me so much of when I was into dubstep. When I first started to listen to
dubstep it was the kind of thing where I was like [draws back], “Do I like it? I
like it but it’s kind of weird.” ‘Cause you can’t relate to it, you’ve got
nothing to base it against. Other music’s been around such a long time. Emma Warren For me, that’s always a signifier of when something’s interesting, when you
hear something and you go, “I don’t understand it, it’s alien, I don’t even
necessarily like it.” But you want to know more. And that demands that you get
into it. Addison Groove It’s when you see the potential as well, you think, “This is crazy.” And if
people are getting down to this then there’s so much room for expansion in
this genre of music. The first dubstep event I went to was
Subloaded in Bristol and I was blown away. The tune
that blew me away was Coki, “Officer.” When I heard that I
was, “Oh my god, that’s it, I’ve got to make this music.” Emma Warren Can we hear some Headhunter stuff? Obviously, you’ve got this back catalog
of older Headhunter stuff you’ve put out on Tempa, but you’re still making stuff as Headhunter
now, aren’t you? Can we maybe hear some old Headhunter and some new
Headhunter? Addison Groove Yeah, I can play you an old track. This is from the Nomad album,
“Prototype.” (music: Headhunter – “Prototype” / applause) That track took a long time to get going. When I used to make dubstep the only
DJ I was really into was Youngsta,
so essentially I was making music for Youngsta. Emma Warren Do you want to explain who that is, for people who don’t know. Addison Groove He was around from the start, pretty much, and he defined himself by playing
only four or five producers. When I learned about Youngsta I knew he played
tunes by Loefah, Skream, Benga, Mala, D1, maybe Coki. He had his own
producers and that was it. He wasn’t accepting anything else, it just didn’t
fit into his set. So when I signed to Tempa I broke that mold, I got a track
in there, and I remember people saying, “You’ve got Youngsta playing your
track.” I’m like, cool, that’s what I wanted. My idea when I started making dubstep, my first
idea was I wanna make a style of dubstep that’s Ed Rush and
Optical style and that
wasn’t around then. That’s why it’s got all these techy noises. And it’s got a
long intro for Youngsta to mix. It’s a really good track to mix, this one, you
can mix the bass in and take your time with it. It’s kind of like a techno mix
rather than a drum & bass-style mix. Emma Warren I want to hear a new Headhunter track, but before we play that one, you
alluded to the exclusivity that existed in the early days of dubstep. That’s
definitely something that’s existed throughout lots and lots of scenes, the
idea that you have to go somewhere to hear the music and you have to go and
see a particular DJ to hear a certain artist’s music. This is an idea you
still believe in and still bring it. Addison Groove I do, I still believe in it. So much has gone now. You know, you can go online and download this that
and the other even before it makes peoples’ albums. But when you’ve got quite
a small scene and you’ve got a track that a lot of people would like to hear,
you’ve got to treat it like gold. I’ve currently got a track that people are
pestering me to release so much. Every time I play – or most of the time
I play – people have got their phones [holds phone up]. I look on my
Twitter, “When’s this track coming out?” It’s a remix of Martha & the
Vandellas’ “Jimmy Mack.” It’s just the a capella
fitted the track, it gets a massive reaction. I made that track six months
ago. I didn’t wanna give it to anyone, I knew I was sat on a good track.
Jackmaster, I’m good
friends with him, he was on my case. “Let me know, when can I have it?” So I
gave it to him. Week later, Skream, “I want that track.” OK. Well, I’ve always had
respect for Skream and I gave it to Ben UFO as well. They’re the
only guys with it. The only way you can hear this track is if you go on
YouTube and see people going off to
it. I like that, I like the fact
that you can’t hear it properly but you’ve got to come to the club to hear it.
It’s designed to be played in the club. I didn’t make it to be listened to at
home. When people say, “Can you release it?” – well, it’s completely
unmixable, it’s got an a capella intro, I made it just so I could play it at
the end of my sets. I don’t know why people wanna hear it so much, I don’t
know what their thinking is. Emma Warren See, we wanna hear it now, but if you play it now then it’s fully on YouTube.
Or maybe we can play it after. Unless you wanna do a little snippet? Addison Groove Nah, you need the whole thing. Audience Member You could edit it out on the video. Addison Groove That’s a good point. No, let’s do it at the end. I always play it at the end
of my sets anyway, feels like I’m doing a DJ set. Anyway, I’ve got a new
Headhunter tune. I made this in December and I made it for Youngsta. When I
gave it to him he was, “I can’t believe you made me a riddim and it’s the best
track I’ve got now.” It’s coming out on Black
Box, maybe in about a month’s
time. It’s called “Projector.” It’s not very long, only about four
minutes. Again you can hear a minimal intro ‘cause it’s designed to be DJed
and mixed. (music: Headhunter – “Projector” / applause) Thanks. So all the track does, it has this middle section that does that, and then it rolls out.
Didn’t want it to have a second drop or anything like that. I do like making
tracks like that because it gives me the ability to be a bit more of a geek
than just playing the drum machine stuff. Most of my Addison Groove stuff is
very sampled, it’s just putting sounds in the right place. But with this kind
of stuff a lot of it is down to engineering as well. You just heard that track
and you heard “Prototype” and I think you could hear the difference in the
sound quality. “Prototype” was kind of flat ‘cause back then I didn’t have
outboard compressors, I didn’t have as much information in my head about how
to process sound as I do now. Every sound in Logic, I use Ableton and ReWire.
Every sound in Logic goes through a compressor and EQ and everything,
even little bits, and then I bust everything off and I put little bits
through. I do tiny bits of compression throughout all the stages then tiny
bits of compression through my outboard compressor, back into the computer. I
find if you do all these bits of compression it adds up to a lot more than one
big compression. Tiny bits here and there sum it up; you get stereo-filled
punchy sound, nice bass, everything. I use these production techniques in my
Addison Groove stuff, but the Headhunter stuff is very synthy and techy. I love
doing that, I love being a nerd in the studio, it’s cool. Everyone should. I
think every producer wants that, really. They want to get into their
equipment, but when they do it’s just too technical and you lose the vibe of
the track or something. Emma Warren I think it’s perfectly possible to be a geek with a vibe. The two things are
not mutually exclusive. You mentioned at the beginning of our conversation something about being
into Angolan music and something about searching out tapes from the ’60s and
’70s. Can you tell us a bit more and play us something if you have the sounds
to illustrate? Addison Groove Yes, I’ve got something here. Basically, the internet is a sample library. It’s amazing, everything’s on there now. I’m using it as a way of finding
stuff. There’s so many bloggers out there endlessly uploading stuff that
they’re finding and it’s endless, you could go on for ages. There’s quite a
few dedicated to African music and I’ve really taken a liking to the Angolan
style. The Angolan style, from the ‘60s anyway – what happened was the Portuguese invaded way
before that – so you’ve got a mixture of African music and Portuguese music
and it sounds really nice. I’ll play you some now. Yeah, the internet is full of all
these things. I didn’t know there was Egyptian jazz music until I was like, “Oh,
what’s that?” So you listen to it and I don’t think I’m taking ideas from it
but you have to open your ears to everything. Because I’m playing dance music
at weekends and I’m making it, I don’t actually listen to that much dance
music. People’s albums come out and I like this track because I played it, but
I don’t spend much time listening to dance music. I try not to be influenced
by it all. In my car I’m playing hip-hop or some crazy African stuff. (music: unknown) So there’s a genre of music I never knew existed. My education in music was
from hardcore, back when I was 10. And Michael Jackson maybe. Emma Warren Hardcore and Michael Jackson, a very English combination. Addison Groove My goal when I was 10 was to nick these rave tapes off my mate’s brother. I
didn’t have an older brother, so the only way you were gonna get these tapes of Fantazia or Helter Skelter
– no Helter Skelter, wasn’t around then – Fantazia and
Dreamscape, those were
the two I was trying to get. Actually, this comes to why I’m called Addison
Groove. The reason I chose this name was because Addison was one of the most
popular unisex names of 2009 in the UK. I didn’t want any gender specified to
my name, so Addison. My favorite DJ when I was younger was
Easygroove. He couldn’t mix
very well but his selection was amazing, he would go from piano hardcore into
playing real hard stuff. I always thought he was the best DJ. I always wished
you had Easygroove as selector, but
Ratty as the mixer. Ratty was my
favorite, the way he’d mix and chop the drums up, I thought his mixing was
amazing. But Easygroove’s selection was outstanding and I named my name after
him, essentially. I loved that his name was Easygroove, I thought it was a
really good name, so I managed to get groove in my name. Emma Warren The thing about that era of hardcore is people would see it generally as
something that led to something interesting, or kind of had a role to play, but in itself it wasn’t necessarily very “good.” Addison Groove Very bashed together, yeah. It’s kind of like how juke is in a way, I suppose. Or grime. People were making
music in their bedrooms, going out at the weekends and playing it. The amount
of people they were playing this to was unreal. There were raves with 100 thousand people sometimes.
Castlemorton was 150 thousand
people. It was an illegal rave near Bristol, not far from Bristol, and it made the
front page of every newspaper and the police could do nothing about it. They
couldn’t stop it ‘cause there were so many people there. Every DJ –
Grooverider, Easygroove, so many grooves. Who
else? Top Buzz, LTJ Bukem, and they all did this rave.
Not just them, the orbital in London has a lot to answer for as well. It’s a
big road that goes all the way around London.
Orbital, the electronic band,
are named after it. Emma Warren Good job they didn’t call themselves
M25. Addison Groove Wow, that wouldn’t be good nowadays. Emma Warren The thing about that though, that music wasn’t seen as good at the time.
Obviously, the people that were going there were really loving it, but it
wasn’t seen as good music. Latterly, I think people have understood that this
was really raw, powerful, energy-giving music. Addison Groove The front page of this newspaper said, “Illegal acid-taking monsters –
everyone’s on drugs.” Can they not realize that if there’s a 150,000 people in
one place anywhere in the world, that’s gonna catch on? You’ve got the press
going, “This is bad, this is bad.” And five years after they’ve got Judge
Jules on The Sun in Bizarre talking
about music, saying, “Yeah, this is the cool club.” Shut up! Emma Warren Would you like to follow your 1960s Angolan music with some hardcore? Addison Groove Oh, yeah. Usually, when I DJ I take some records with me, vinyl, real things. Emma Warren Real things. Addison Groove Yeah. What hardcore do I have? What would be better actually is if I play a
snippet of a Dreamscape rave, because you’ll get the idea of where the MC came
from. It was kind of back in ’92. I’m not too sure of the history of the MC in
the UK, but it kind of started about ’92, ’91. Emma Warren Certainly, the MC as host, as we experience it in a club. It probably has a
different lineage if you’re talking from the soundsystem side of it, but certainly the
MC who has a place at a rave or in a dance, yes. Addison Groove It’s very bad quality, this was recorded a long time ago. It’s crashed. It’s
iTunes that’s crashed. Emma Warren While you’re doing that do you have a big collection of hardcore tapepacks
then? Addison Groove Yeah. Emma Warren So your 10 year old self managed to squirrel away a few bits. Addison Groove Because I moved around from when I was about 16, 17, 18, they kind of got lost.
But the great thing is the internet has all of them online. The ones I can
remember from younger, I can locate them all online. There’s been a track in
my head since I was about 12. I lost the tape, but last week I found the track
online, which was really nice. (music: Dreamscape tape) It’s just dark messy stuff, there’s no
definition, it’s just “take drugs” music. But I wasn’t on drugs when I was 10
or 12, I was just, “This is the shit!” There’s something about it. Emma Warren Everyone goes on about being open-minded and you should listen to lots of
different music, but when you talk to people about liking, say,
psytrance, people are often
a bit confused. Addison Groove People do get confused. People are, “What?” I like all music. If something has
something good about it, even if it’s in the charts or whatever, if it has an
element of something I like about it, I’ll listen to it. What I liked about
psytrance was the noises, the sound design that took place in these tracks. I
really like
Hallucinogen, a very
obvious person to like in psytrance, but I really like him, his whole crew. He
had a label called
Twisted and you listen
to that stuff it just evolves and evolves, just synthesizers bouncing off each
other going crazy. Psytrance is interesting because it’s never gone mainstream
in the UK, yet it’s got a massive following around the world. It’s one of
these underground scenes that’s always been there, but not a lot of people in
the UK are aware of it. I think it’s quite an interesting scene. Emma Warren It’s one of those things that signifies something. Sometimes a signifier of an
interesting scene can be if everyone thinks it’s a load of rubbish. Everyone
being not necessarily the best judge of stuff. Addison Groove In the days of dubstep you could play to a room of 15 to 20 people. But all
those people knew what potential it had. Even back then the music was so good,
it was like you know something and no one else does. Now look at dubstep, it’s
huge. Unfortunately you find there’s not much room for the deep style. Emma Warren Can you give us a sense of how things were on the dubstep scene when you
started and how things are now? Addison Groove I don’t really play that many dubstep events anymore. I actually did one on Saturday,
which was quite good. It was me and Jakes and I played live actually, but I had to chuck
in a few of those tracks that I mentioned earlier ‘cause I knew a lot of the
crowd were into Jakes’ stuff. I’m a great friend of Jakes’, I used to live
with him, but what he played was what I know Jakes for, it was too aggressive
for me. Some tracks I did like, but some were a bit too noisy. That’s what
happens. Dubstep has gotten big and it’s because it’s got noisier – to a lot
of people that’s the appeal. Emma Warren I guess there’s a heavy metal aspect. Some people are obviously very
sophisticated in their listening from very, very young, but when you’re 17 all you want is a big noise that makes you feel big and massive because it’s kind of simple. Addison Groove When I was 17 I was going out to see Ed Rush and Optical, and the heavier the
track, the better. But as you grow a bit older your ear changes. Emma Warren But Ed Rush and Optical tracks generally stand the test of time. Addison Groove Definitely. Emma Warren Can we hear something else from you? We’ll put it out to questions fairly
soon, so start thinking about what you wanna ask. Addison Groove I recently did a DJ Shadow remix, it’s
gonna come out fairly soon. It’s a rewind track. Emma Warren Before you play it, do you wanna tell us the story about how the wrong version of it wound up on the internet? Addison Groove I made one version, about 125 BPM, and I gave it to
Island. They were, “We like it,
but can you do something a bit more dubbed out, a bit heavier?” OK, lemme go
back to the drawing board. I made another version and the other version was
heavier. I thought this one’s probably gonna get a rewind. So I emailed the
what I thought was this version to Skream. He replied, “I love it, it’s wicked.” Later I find
out the version I emailed to him wasn’t the smashing version, it was the
slowed-down version. Yet he still played it, which was kind of nice. So I
don’t think this one’s been played online, but I know they gave a promo out of
it a week ago. (music: DJ Shadow – “Excited (Addison Groove Remix)”) Emma Warren Definitely feeling that Dreamscape influence in there. Addison Groove Yeah. Well, the reason I had the drums on the start, it’s the kind of track
that doesn’t need to be mixed, it needs to be dropped. That was the plan. I
sat down and that track probably took me two to three hours to make. But what
does take time is the mixdown. I can make a tune really fast but the mixdown
takes a while. Emma Warren What’s a while in your world? Addison Groove Hmmm. Three hours? But I do the mixdown the day after, I never do it the same
day. My ears become tired, fatigued, so I wake up the next day and get a
coffee and it’s the first thing I do in the day ‘cause I know my ears are
fresh. It seems to work. I used to do this thing where I’d start a track in
the nighttime and in the morning I’d do the mixdown. I did that for a while,
but now schedules are a bit crazy and I can’t do that so much anymore. That
was a way of working for a while for me. Emma Warren So mornings are for mixdowns, afternoons and evenings are for fresh tunes. Addison Groove Yeah, generally. That’s how it works in my world. Emma Warren What do guys you want to know? Who wants to go first? Audience member Hello! This is for both of you, actually. Do you guys see any similarity
between the way gabber, hardcore and psytrance was
in the ‘90s and the way dubstep is now? Made for maximum impact and really
popular amongst young teenagers and stuff like that? Don’t take it the wrong way. [laughs] Addison Groove I’ve been DJing this stuff since 2005 and it’s growing and growing. But I’ve
noticed the crowds have generally stayed the same age – about 18 to 25. Unless
you go somewhere like Berlin where you get an older crowd. I want to make
music and don’t look at it as a job, but I want to keep myself in a job. So if
I wanna go and DJ, I want to make this music that the crowd can go off to. So like that track I just played, I know that’s gonna go off in a club. But I’ll then go and make something that won’t be played in a club. I’ll balance it out by
making different styles. But I know what you mean – it is very directed at
that club scene. Audience member I’m not at all talking about your music. Addison Groove No, but I’m giving you an example of how it would work for me. I’ve seen the
crowd stay the same age, so I’ve kept the music as something that other people
can play, I can play. Explain what you mean again. Audience member You played us examples of hardcore tracks and psytrance tracks from the ‘90s and it sort of makes me think of a Skrillex sound, you know what I mean? Like 15 years removed, but still the maximum impact and high energy and
still this simplicity too. Addison Groove I wouldn’t have given you this example if I hadn’t grown up on it. When I was
younger that’s what I was into, so I listen to it now for nostalgia. But it is
high energy and the same rules apply to today’s music, like Skrillex, and to
what it was then. Emma Warren I’d just add that the main difference is that the roots of those things are
different so the fruits of those things are gonna be different. Maybe there
are areas that are comparable but I don’t know if psytrance has a deep
underground. Skrillex is part of the dubstep world, like it or not, but
there’s also stuff which comes from that culture that is very different, which
is deeper, more underground, more musically rounded. I don’t know if that is true with
psytrance, it may well be, but I don’t know if it is. To me that’d be the
difference. There are similarities but the bigger picture would be different. Audience member Speaking again of the rave music from the ‘90s, it was prohibited stuff and it
added some spicy flavor to this music, because it was forbidden fruit. Emma Warren Do you mean not cool, or was it literally prohibited in some areas? Audience member It was not illegal, but it was not like nowadays, when the dubstep is pushed and
you can hear a lot of tunes every day, every blog. Sometimes I walk along the
streets in my city and I see some street dancers, some really young guys, like
15, and they’re trying to move to dubstep. When I hear some commercials, I
hear dubstep at the background. What do you think is more effective and
important and true, that the music should be prohibited, illegal or open to
the whole world? What pushes it forwards more effectively? Emma Warren You mean should stuff stay underground or should it be for everybody? Addison Groove What exists right now, there’s underground elements of it. The track I played
just now, my track, I’d say that’s an underground track, it’s not played by
the biggest DJs. I remember with drum & bass, you played it in the clubs and
then you started to hear it in commercials. I don’t think it took anything
away from the music that I didn’t like about it. It existed there and it
existed in the club, it’s a different kind of thing. Do you have anything to
say on this? Emma Warren No, I agree. You can’t expect a scene that had so much energy in it to stay as it
was. Stuff has a life of its own. Everything that’s happened was bound to
happen and then that will go off and create other stuff. Scenes don’t exist
separately from other things, everything feeds everything else. Addison Groove And dubstep is so variable. You can have that high-energy sound and then you
can have that very slow-paced track which will fit on a film or a commercial.
That’s the great thing about dubstep. When I first heard it, it opened me up
to dubstep. I was like, “Wow, the possibilities are amazing.” When I was
getting into dubstep I was, “Wait until the Brazilians get into this. They’ll
make some crazy rhythms.” Yet to hear it, I think, but that happened with drum
& bass. Emma Warren You mean like what Patife and co. did with Brazilian drum & bass? Addison Groove They took it in a Brazilian style and it reinvented drum & bass. Emma Warren Where’s the samba step? It’s a challenge out now. Addison Groove It’s just a great tempo to work at so you can do various things with it. Emma Warren That was my thing about dubstep, that it wasn’t a genre, it was a community of
people making music at roughly the tempo and at roughly the same kind of feel. It wasn’t a genre, and
that’s why it can support loads of different types in this very, very broad
umbrella. Addison Groove It’s the same as this whole movement with what’s going on now with Night
Slugs, Swamp 81, you can’t
really define what it is. If anything, but it’s dubstep in a way. Emma Warren Steve Reich said at the Academy, any artist that talks about genres should
wash their mouth out with soap and water. Leave that to the journalists. Audience member Hi, I’m probably a similar age to yourself. My first love was hardcore, early
‘90s, maybe a bit later, ‘92, ’93. I perceive it as being this dirty word, all
a bit messy. But for the benefit of people who don’t know, can you namecheck
some DJs, people worth checking out to hear the good stuff? Addison Groove I can give you a record label. Basement
Records, almost their whole
catalog is great. From hardcore into… it wasn’t officially a genre, but,
back to these genre things, some people coined the term jungle-techno. What
happened with Basement and a few labels, it started off as a hardcore label
and evolved into a jungle label. You listen to all their releases and you see
the progression. That’s a great label to understand how throughout the years
hardcore into jungle happened. And Moving Shadow as well. Moving Shadow is
one of the greatest dance labels ever. They started off as a hardcore label
and moved through into jungle. It’s a great transition, you can see it unfold. And it happened very quickly. From ‘92 up until ‘94. You had hardcore in ‘92. Then by ‘94 it
was going into jungle. In the space of that time it transformed quite quickly. Audience member Just one more, do you see a similarity between jungle music and footwork? Addison Groove Oh, yeah. I mixed your track last night into a drum & bass tune at the club.
You’re a great example of the drum & bass-footwork. Emma Warren Do you wanna tell us the track you’re talking about? Addison Groove The Adam F one, “Circles.” Audience member Yeah, I did some edits of jungle stuff into footwork. Addison Groove Fantastic, I’d say. I’ve been playing it in most of my sets ‘cause I like to
finish off quite fast. That particular track mixes well with jungle. I find that footwork stuff is almost the same tempo as jungle. When you put a
drum & bass loop underneath a juke track it really works well. It all feels like
the same thing to me. Audience member It’s interesting what you’re thinking about your love of jungle and now
footwork, whether there’s a connection. Addison Groove What it’s done for me is given me the ability to DJ jungle again, ‘cause I can
bring it into my sets. I love it, it’s cool. Audience member I just saw Rashad spin in Berlin and he put jungle into his set, just two
songs. I was like, “Whaaat?” Addison Groove Excellent. I played with Rashad last week and every time I love it. He’s full
of energy, it’s a good energy. Emma Warren Is this when you and Rashad were in Poland? Addison Groove Yes, we played the Unsound
Festival. Audience member I was just going to ask if you prefer DJing or playing live? Addison Groove I get asked that quite a lot. I don’t prefer any because the way it works, I’ll
DJ twice on a weekend and the weekend after I’ll do two live set. It’s fairly
balanced, nicely balanced. So, say in a month I did ten gigs, three or four of
them will be live. So it keeps that nice element of it still being quite rare.
I think if I did it all the time, maybe not so much. I enjoy DJing juke, I
like playing people’s music in a club, I like mixing. The DJ sets have that
energy that’s higher than a live set. But I like them equally and in different
ways. Audience member Hi. The thing about juke, a lot of music from different origins is merging into
it. It kind of bridges between a lot of things, like the first music you
hear when you’re a teenager and you put your anger into it. For some of us,
that was hardcore, for others it’s maybe heavy hip-hop or Chicago house music.
You’ll find all these things in there. Basically my question was: When was your first
contact with juke? For example, I started listening to rap music really late and the
first time I heard it in a club was a UK DJ, Martello, and it was a remix of
Young Money, “I like every girl in the world,” so there’s a low-pitch vocal at
some point. Then it started looping and the tom came. That was the first time
I heard fast music for a long time that was actually good in clubs. So was it
a UK DJ or did you have it straight from Chicago? Addison Groove Early on, maybe 2005, I heard the “Percolator” track. I was like, I like that track. Emma Warren Give us a bit more context of what you’re talking about. Addison Groove The “Percolator” track was the biggest booty-bass track around. Do you know
when it came out? Emma Warren Nineties. Addison Groove I didn’t learn about it till later. At the time I was really getting into
this dubstep stuff. Years later I saw on YouTube these footwork battles, 2008 maybe, and it
reminded me of the “Percolator” stuff. I thought this is interesting, kind of
ghettotech style but super-rhythmic. I learned about juke the same way I
learned Ableton – YouTube. I was watching the videos, listening, and
this is the insanest thing I’ve heard since dubstep. It’s simply that, just
being a curious YouTuber. Emma Warren School of YouTube. Audience member Who were the other UK DJs who were into this and spurred this movement? Addison Groove There were a few people who were making stuff that were influenced by it.
Ramadanman, he had a
release on Swamp 81, and Girl Unit, Night Slugs. These
tracks came out around the same time as “Footcrab” so we were all aware that
juke is around. Emma Warren Also Mike Paradinas from Planet Mu, who
put out the Bangs And Works
compilation. He was very on it as well. He talked about having to search
people down on Facebook, he didn’t know what their names were. He found Rashad
‘cause one of Rashad’s old teachers had built a website for someone and he
managed to locate these people. Addison Groove He basically found these people in Chicago who are impossible to find. There’s this music around, you don’t know anything about the artist, don’t know how to get hold of him. I think that’s what appeals to it as well, that alienness of it. Everything’s open on the Internet. I was saying earlier about keeping tracks just for the clubs, it’s that kind of thing. It gives you a bit of mystery. Like
Burial; he became iconic,
his music is amazing, but at the same time there was such a mystery around it.
You had these two things going on. UK thing maybe. [laughs] Audience member I’m curious, you have these two alter egos. How do you decide which one is which? Do you think, “Now I’m gonna work on an Addison Groove track”? Or do you work on a track and go, “This is…”? Do you have a hard time figuring out which one? Addison Groove I know what you mean. There’s definition between the two. One is using the
drum machine. I do limit myself, and from me limiting myself using the
drum machine, it’s made me more creative with it. Audience member So you only use the drum machine for Addison Groove stuff? Addison Groove Not entirely, I use samples of course. Audience member But you wouldn’t use it for Headhunter? Addison Groove I’ve used it for a couple of sounds, but the difference is the Headhunter
stuff is very half-step style, dubstep; it has that sound to it. Addison
Groove style is a bit looser – it could be house-y, techno-y kind of thing, so I never
really know what I’m making when I make an Addison Groove track. But when I
make a Headhunter track, I know what I want the end result will sound like, I
know what I want it to be, how to shape it. Audience member Do you ever find yourself working on something and it’s in between, then you
have to take it one way or another? Addison Groove There’s one track that’s gonna come out on a compilation on
Tectonic soon, which
is literally half and half. It’s gonna be an Addison Groove thing – it’s quite
techy, but it’s using the drum machine as well. Emma Warren Do you think there’d be another name on the horizon if you started making
music that was radically different? Addison Groove Hmm, I hadn’t thought about that. I don’t think so. I really enjoy the
versatility and doing things at different tempos. I don’t feel the need to find another one. Emma Warren So it’s more like you think this sound will develop, so Addison Groove will
develop as a sound. Rather than kind of more like if you look at Mark Pritchard’s records, he
marked the different phases of his career with different names, probably for
lots of different reasons. Addison Groove I haven’t been around for that long really so maybe I’ll change my attitude in
a couple of years. Emma Warren Two down, see what happens next. Addison Groove But it’s nice to have no restrictions on I can do. I like keeping things as
Addison Groove because it’s good to build one name. It’s important not to
spread yourself too thinly. If you keep one thing, and keep it going… an
example of that would be someone like Modeselektor. They released their first album,
their second album, their third album, and now they’re on the front cover of all
the magazines. They’ve kept it consistent with the same idea. Emma Warren Do we have any more questions? Audience member You’ve talked about the mixdown being one of the most challenging parts of
track making. How much do you see that as being part of the artistry of it?
Would you delegate that to someone else or do you take pride in that? Addison Groove No, I enjoy it and I enjoy making things sound the way I like them to sound.
But you could listen to 100 juke tracks that are produced really, really badly, and they sound amazing because they’re full of this soul and vibe. I’d say to
anyone, music composition is far greater than the mixdown. But it does help to
be able to sculpt sound and control it the way you want it to be. It’s a good
element to have as part of your production. But I’d say the composition part of it is far greater. Audience member We’ve been talking a bit about juke and footwork, but we haven’t talked
about the dance. I think that should be brought up because the music wouldn’t
exist without the dance and vice versa. Addison Groove That’s right. It’s the first instance of something like this existing in
current time. Obviously, before it was breakdancing, rap and hip-hop. Audience member Have you seen any dancing live yet? Addison Groove No. Audience member It’s hard to come by. Addison Groove I wish. I’ve spent some time with Rashad and I said, “Can you show me
something?” But there was no time to do that. I’d love to. I think there were
some people touring as part of the Planet Mu tour. Audience member The music is really good, it’s really weird. And they know this already,
it’s just the perils of touring with more than one or two people. It costs money, it’s expensive. And also, the dancers feed off each other, so one or two
dancers the entire night is too much, and it’s a difficult dance. I’m from
Chicago, I’ve been to a few battles on the South Side. It’s amazing. You can
literally be there for three or four hours and hear nothing but footwork, but
never once think, “Oh, this is too much.” Because the dancing is so exciting
and the DJs feed off the dancers. Addison Groove It reminds me of tap dancing. Audience member It’s crazy, the battles, they need to take five- to ten-minute breaks after sessions because they go so hard. Emma Warren Is the dancing evolving? Audience member Yeah, it’s really cool. It’s a very small, small niche. Even in Chicago it’s very small. Most DJs in Chicago aren’t playing footwork or juke. Emma Warren What do you mean by small? A couple of hundred people? Participant Yeah, a few hundred people. It’s still predominantly very black, very South Side. Chicago is massive and it’s very segregated still. Addison Groove Are there dedicated clubs putting juke on? Or footwork parties? Audience member The footwork parties happen, but not really in clubs, ‘cause it’s a very young scene. There’s kids like nine, eight, 10 year olds dancing. It’s community-based, too, ‘cause the South Side of Chicago is really hood, really rough. It’s about keeping kids off the streets, instead of selling drugs, gangs, which is really bad in Chicago. Addison Groove It’s a positive underground vibe. Audience member It’s usually $5 to get in and at a community center. It’s not at nightclubs, they don’t even sell alcohol. It’s at community centers or parks. A lot of times in summer you’ll see it in the street. Addison Groove It must be amazing for Rashad and Spinn then to come over and see it in clubs.
When you play their music in clubs it sounds really good. Audience member They set up whatever speakers they can get their hands on that has some
bass and they’ll play, play, play. Dancers will make suggestions, they’ll
tease, “Give me something harder, faster.” So Rashad is forced to play
something a little faster, harder. Rashad and Spinn are at a certain level now, but
then you’ve got kids like Earl and Manny that are 18,
19, that are coming up. They hang out together and make beats on the MPC.
They’ll make seven, eight, or nine a day, all day. They don’t do anything but
make beats. They’re not DJing, they just make beats all day, it’s crazy. Addison Groove I guess people in the UK or around the world, if they make music, they’re making it
for the club. But these guys aren’t necessarily doing that. Audience member They’re making it for the dances. If they stop making music the dances will
stop evolving, and vice versa. Addison Groove It’s amazing, it’s really cool. Emma Warren I can only second all of that. Are we finished with questions? If you have
anything you can come up and talk to each other afterwards. So if we consider
ourselves finished we should do our thank-you’s and then have our little
secret moment. Addison Groove, thank you very much. [applause]

---

Title: Arturo Lanz
Date: 2015-04-19
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/arturo-lanz-cold-wave-drum-machines/

Arturo Lanz
Arturo Lanz abandoned a career in pop music for one in uncompromising industrial – or repetitive meditation music, as he would put it – as Esplendor Geométrico in the early years of post-Franco Spain. Looking to Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire, he forged a sound that his compatriots didn’t get, but which made him something of a cult figure decades later, when a track was revived for the Minimal Wave Vol. 1 compilation. Now living and working in Beijing, he divides his free time between running, cycling and music. Not that he ever listens to his own stuff – or even names or edits it, all tasks he leaves to other people.
In his 2011 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, Lanz discusses the influence of Throbbing Gristle, the ’80s music scene in Madrid, his cavalier approach to releasing music, and more.
Hosted by Emma Warren But we have with us a man who’s been hugely important in industrial music and the music
he’s made with his band Esplendor Geométrico – sorry, I’m going to have to apologize
throughout for a very poor Spanish pronunciation – has been massively
influential on music that you would expect, but also on music that you wouldn’t
expect. We’re gonna be hearing some of the music he’s been making recently,
because this is someone with a creative lifespan that spans many decades. When you think abou it, most
people have a purple patch, a period when they’re creative and making stuff. But usually that period is fairly finite. I think you can say, accurately with
this band, they’ve remained creatively interesting, strong, confrontational
and powerful, throughout a long time. So I’d like to say a very, very big
welcome to Arturo Lanz. [applause] Arturo Lanz Thank you, thank you. Emma Warren We’re going to get some context later on and find out about Madrid in 1980 and
the context that made you make music. But before that I’d like to hear some of
the new music you’ve made. You’ve got an album that came out, was it yesterday? Arturo Lanz Two days ago. Emma Warren OK, two days ago. So we’re talking something brand spanking new. Do you want to tell us a bit
about the new record before we hear anything? Arturo Lanz It’s the music I make in my home at night, trying to meditate with my music.
This is the purpose of my music, something for myself and for meditation in
the evening. I have friends and they consider that it is possible to publish.
This is my career; there are no more secrets. Emma Warren I have to admit that I haven’t heard this album, but the music that I have heard of yours that you did
from 1981 up to the mid-’80s and the early ’90s is not what I would call meditation music. [laughter] You extract tones from machines, you scream, you shout. This is powerful stuff. Arturo Lanz They are very repetitive. Emma Warren So this meditation music, is it a radical departure for you? Are you making dolphin music? Arturo Lanz No, no, no, it’s not like that. It’s something like a mantra. Maybe for the rest of the people it’s a crazy idea, but for me it’s like this. Emma Warren So for you it’s like this. What’s the track you’re going to play us? Arturo Lanz I don’t know, the first one. (music: Esplendor Geométrico — “Puntos De Centrado” / applause) Emma Warren So we have meditation industrial-style there. There’s something I’m very interested in here. When you think about industrial music you think about being bludgeoned with something. You think about machines. You don’t think about funk in a natural sense, but somehow your music has a lot of groove in it. How do you find a groove when your source material is industrial sounds and machine music and aggressive sounds like that? Arturo Lanz When I am in my home and start to do this I don’t consider this is industrial. It’s the
people who call it industrial. At the beginning with Throbbing Gristle and
Cabaret Voltaire... Well, I consider industrial music only Throbbing Gristle.
The rest of the groups, for instance, Esplendor Geométrico, I don’t think it’s
industrial. It’s more repetitive music, something non-industrial. Maybe dance
music. Emma Warren So not industrial, but repetitive music definitely. So, for you, where’s the
groove in repetitive music? Arturo Lanz The groove? What is groove? [laughs] Emma Warren [laughs] OK, perhaps we started in slightly too complicated a fashion.
Certainly, for me today, I’m going to keep things simple. Tell me about the
beginning. You started making music in 1980 in Madrid, so obviously this is a
time of great political change and also a period where people were reacting to
the years of dictatorship. Can you give us a sense of what it was like to be
young and creative at that point, and what you were responding to? Arturo Lanz Well, I was 16 years old in 1977 and we started in ’77, ’78 with a group called
El Aviador Dro, which was techno-pop music. More pop than techno. Emma Warren So this is your first band, 1980? Arturo Lanz Yeah. In 1980 in Madrid, the ambience in Madrid was very [creative] with
Almodovar and so on making
short films, and there was a free movement after Franco. The people wanted to
do something and around this time I heard the Sex Pistols and realized it’s
very easy for you do something with music while not having any idea about
music. And we started doing this until ’80; then I started Esplendor Geométrico. Emma Warren So before 1980 you’re in your band, you’re inspired by the Sex Pistols, and you realize you can
make music. Again, some people may have an idea of what life was like in Spain
under Franco, to other people it may not be so clear. Can you give us a sense
of what it’s like to live under his regime? Was he very controlling of music
and culture? Is this something that affected everybody on an everyday level? Arturo Lanz I was very young and when I realized I lived under the Franco regime it was
almost at an end of the situation. I didn’t realize that I lived in a
dictatorship. Emma Warren So it wasn’t impacting on you personally? Arturo Lanz Yes, by ’76 I realized that before that there had been no freedom at all. My
family explained to me that it was terrible. People had had it up to here of
this situation. Now that I live in Beijing, it’s the same feeling. I think it’s very
similar to these years in Madrid. Emma Warren I want to ask you about Beijing and your observations of that city, but for
the moment we should get back to the beginnings of your musical career. You’re
in this band, El Aviador. You’re making music that’s somewhere around the
Kraftwerk kind of area? Arturo Lanz No, no. Emma Warren Not at all? This internet is full of lies, man. Don’t believe anything you
read online. So you tell me what was the music like of that band. Arturo Lanz It’s pop, but we have some futuristic costumes. We were like
Devo, we were a total copy because in Spain it was like this. Emma Warren But actually, that’s an interesting thing, isn’t it? Often, the way people start creatively
is to take something they like and to do it themselves but to do it slightly wrong.
Either that can be the beginning of your own creative path, or you can create
your own sound as a reaction to the thing you do wrong. Would you say that was
the case for you? Arturo Lanz Yes, it was copying this and I was the voice in the group, I didn’t make any
music. In the ’80s I realized it was bullshit, terrible. I heard something
more interesting and started to do something more vital for me. Emma Warren So you say you heard something more interesting and wanted to do something
more vital. What was it you heard that made you stop making music like Devo in
costumes and do something more vital? Arturo Lanz Throbbing Gristle. They were the first group that made me say, “OK, this is incredible.” Emma Warren How did you first come across Throbbing Gristle? Do you recall how it felt
when you first heard their music? Maybe you have something to play. Arturo Lanz By Throbbing Gristle? Emma Warren Yes. Arturo Lanz Yeah, yeah. But I have something new. Emma Warren Tell us then about your early interactions with this band, when you first
heard them. Arturo Lanz Throbbing Gristle? I was in Switzerland, in Zürich, and I was in a record
shop. The people in the shop were very nice and, “This is very good. If you’re
looking for something different, you have to have this.” Then – and this is
very important in music and in life – I was lucky that this man in the record
shop was very interested to show me something new. Emma Warren So a random interaction in a Swiss record shop and suddenly Throbbing Gristle
enter your life. That’s a powerful set of people to have in your household. Arturo Lanz Then we started doing something more special. At the beginning it was pop;
Esplendor Geométrico was a little pop. I can put something of this on. This is
“Moscú Está Halado.” Do you have “Moscú”? Emma Warren “Moscú”? Yes. See if you can find it; let’s have a race. I think you’re gonna win. So this is the track that was reissued on the Stones Throw label recently, Minimal Wave Vol. 1, where they collected music that had been influential, early electronic repetitive industrial world. And through that a whole load of other people found out about your music. Arturo Lanz We can play this. In this time it was very innocent music. About ’79. (music: Esplendor Geométrico — “Moscú Está Helado”) (music: Esplendor Geométrico — “Necrosis En La Poya” / applause) I consider this the first song by Esplendor Geométrico. Emma Warren Is this one of the ones released on cassette? Arturo Lanz No, it was a single. Emma Warren So you did it as a 7”. Arturo Lanz Yeah. Emma Warren But you also released some cassettes, didn’t you? These were things you did
yourself? Arturo Lanz Yes, after this record we did the first cassette. Emma Warren So how important was it for you to be in control of your own material, both
financially, in terms of the structure, and also creative freedom? Arturo Lanz There was no other way in Spain at this time. This kind of music was
impossible, even to play live it was impossible. And people in Spain didn’t understand anything about this music. Emma Warren So why was it impossible to play? Because no one wanted to come and see you?
Or was it considered too controversial? Arturo Lanz Yeah, very controversial, and also everyone thought I was crazy. This was in the ’80s
and people in Spain were focused on pop, and to be happy and to be fun. If you do
something that isn’t fun then you are from another planet. People don’t speak
to you, they say, “This is crazy.” Emma Warren So why was it so controversial? Just because it was music that people had never experienced before or you were covering things and using images and ideas that were quite shocking? Arturo Lanz We were against this and we were against these people. The words of the songs
were a little heavy. Nowadays, in Spain I think it’s impossible to use these
kinds of words for the songs. We’d be in jail. Emma Warren So you think you’d be imprisoned if you made music now like you made in the
’80s. Arturo Lanz With these words, yeah. Emma Warren How do you feel about that now? Are there things that you regret or do you
believe that an artist should never censor themself no matter how offensive other people might find it? Arturo Lanz Now I don’t do anything about this. I don’t need to. But at this age, 16 years old, yeah. We need to do something in Spain like this. Emma Warren You talk about yourself being 16 years old, so is that the impulse of that point in your life or is it the impulse of someone coming out of a country in dictatorship? Arturo Lanz It’s a reaction against some people who think music is only joy and funny. For
me at this time, it was not like this. Emma Warren So you wanted to make some music that was not joyful and not funny. Can you
tell us a bit more about how that showed itself or maybe play us some other
music which kind of fits into this category? Arturo Lanz For example, this one. (music: Esplendor Geométrico — unknown / applause) Emma Warren You’ve kind of already answered this but I have to ask you this again after
hearing that record, where do you stand on censorship generally for an artist?
Should artists ever censor themselves or should an artist always feel free to
make the music they feel regardless of potential offense to other people? Arturo Lanz Can you repeat, please? [laughs] Emma Warren Do you think artists should censor themselves? What’s more important – my right
to say what I want or your right not to be offended? Arturo Lanz Now, I think it’s very important don’t offend the people. I think that’s the most
important. Enjoy your music but try not to offend anyone. Emma Warren Does that just come down to words, to lyrics? Obviously, before you were writing words, there’s still a vocal
element to what you’re doing. But I understand you tend to use words you find,
found material, newspaper headlines. Words you like rather than lyrics that
mean something. You’ve said you don’t want to offend people. Musically, you
still want to be strong and powerful and confrontational, but you no longer
want to use words that other people would find offensive. Is there a
difference between words and music in terms of their power? Arturo Lanz No, because with music it’s impossible to offend anyone. I do it for myself.
I don’t do it for anyone. I don’t think I offend anyone, only me. If I don’t
like it then I’m offended by my music. But the rest of the people, if they don’t
like it then don’t listen to this music. It’s very easy. But with words it’s
different, because the words, the people can suffer with what you say and I don’t want the people to suffer. Emma Warren Let’s talk for a minute about the equipment you’re using to make these
records. You’re coming from a band that was more kind of pop-centred. You started the band with two other people, and I understand you picked up a Korg and a four-track recorder. So what was it, an MS-20? Arturo Lanz MS-20, yeah, and an echo very primitive, and delay. And, of course, there’s no Logic. At this time it doesn’t exist. One record for two tracks. Emma Warren So a two-track recorder. Arturo Lanz MS-20 and MS-10. Emma Warren So were these machines easy to get at that point or were they still quite rare
or expensive? Arturo Lanz Two members of Esplendor Geométrico sold their guitars and bass and bought the
synthesizers. Emma Warren So they sold their guitar and their bass for their synths, a transaction which
other people would recognize. Were you aware of other people making machine
music? Were you aware of others or did you feel like only you were doing this? Arturo Lanz In Spain no one else was doing this music. Emma Warren I guess, I’m interested in knowing who you considered to be your peers. Who
was making music similar to you? Arturo Lanz Cabaret Voltaire and Throbbing Gristle and at the same time there’s
SPK from Australia. We had
friendly relations with SPK. Emma Warren What did the Korg and the two-track recorder give you that the guitars and the
drums couldn’t give you before? What was the difference working with the Korg,
a machine, and the instruments? Arturo Lanz It was much easier. You can do it at home with earphones, very easy. The
guitars and the drums in your room at home, this is awful. You have to be a
local to stay there. In my room it was impossible, my family hated this music.
I can’t use earphones with the guitar. Emma Warren So did your family enjoy your music more once you moved to the Korg? Arturo Lanz No, no, no. [laughter] They’re happy for me because I’m happy, but the music for my family is not very serious. Emma Warren One other thing about this particular period in time... You took your name from an Italian
futurist. Was it common at that time to be inspired by politics and radical
philosophy? I think now if you talked to musicians and say, “Are you inspired
by politics and radical philosophy?” – most people would say no. I could be
wrong, but I think generally people feel politics and music should be
separate. Quite often they are quite separate, and there aren’t many people
working in a way that’s naturally cohesive between the two. So was this a normal thing to do at the time? Arturo Lanz Well, yes. The name was very nice in Spanish. Esplendor Geométrico sounds very good. And
we were reading a lot of futurist philosophy books. El Aviador is the name of
a futurist opera and Esplendor Geométrico is a poem by
[Filippo Tommaso] Marinetti. There’s
nothing behind this though, it’s only the name because we thought it
was beautiful. It’s nothing intellectual. Emma Warren So for you it was just that you liked the sound of the words. Arturo Lanz Yes. It’s like with the CDs, the names of the tracks, there’s nothing behind
it. I don’t choose the names, it’s other people. For me, it’s not interesting
to choose the names. Emma Warren Is that because you want the listeners to have the freedom to take what they
want from it? Arturo Lanz Yes, even for me. Emma Warren It’s interesting because at the same time people from Detroit, people like
Juan Atkins who went on to make
Detroit techno, were listening to music that overlapped with the music you
were listening to and were interested in futuristic texts. For them, I guess,
it was more Alvin Toffler than
Marinetti or the people you were listening to, but it does seem across the
world at that time there were people having the same idea who were expressing
it differently. I guess the Detroit guys were taking the industrial sounds of
their city and it sounded like techno; you were taking the sounds of your city
and making it sound different. Point over. [laughs] OK, we’ve talked about
some of the first pieces of music you made, but you carried on making tens of
albums. I think you made three, four, five albums in the ’80s. Was it four? Arturo Lanz I don’t know. Emma Warren Loads. Anyway. But there was one album in 1988, Mekano-Turbo, which seemed to have another turning point with some
other influences coming in. Do you have some music from that album with you? Arturo Lanz No. Emma Warren If not that one, perhaps there’s music from another album in the ’80s that
you’d care to share with us. ’Cause this is a point, you had started your
label, Esplendor Geométrico Discos, in 1985, I guess partly because you had to, but also because you had this creative
freedom. Arturo Lanz I don’t know if I have it here. I don’t listen to my music. I never listen to
my music. Emma Warren I guess some of us will be listening to your music when you play. Arturo Lanz Yeah, I like to hear my music live. Because it’s the only opportunity I have
to have a lot of sound, a lot of power. Emma Warren I guess anyone who’s seen YouTube clips of you performing will know there’s a
lot of energy and power in your performance. I mean, really. Arturo Lanz This last CD, maybe after one week I’m not going to listen to it again.
Because it’s very boring for me. Emma Warren What will you be performing when we see you play? Arturo Lanz From this last one ‘cause it’s the most enjoyable, because the old one is
terrible, you know? Very boring. [laughs] Emma Warren I guess this is obvious, but when you’ve been making music a long time and
people are interested in a certain period of your music, how do you keep pushing forwards? How do
you keep the creative power when probably people just want to listen back to
the old stuff ‘cause it’s easier now? Arturo Lanz Because I don’t think about people when I make music. This “Moscú Está Halado”
that was on the compilation is terrible for me now, I don’t like it. I don’t
consider this my music anymore. I don’t recognize me in the music I did in the
past. Always in the new, because the past is past. There’s only the present. Emma Warren So you’re a true modernist in that
sense, always having to do the music you’re doing now. Let’s stick with the
live performance, because I’ve seen clips of you onstage. You’re banging things,
you’re storming around the stage. You’re very present on the stage, pretending to hang
yourself. You’ve got your microphone in your mouth. It’s a very strong way of
performing, specifically the thing to do with the microphone. Actually swallowing
the microphone and performing with it. So you don’t need any hands, you’re
holding it in your mouth. How did you start doing that? Arturo Lanz It’s natural. [laughs] It’s nothing I studied, it’s in the state. During the
state, similar to a mantra or something, then you can do this. Even I a gym, I did
exercise in Germany in one concert. The power of the sound is very repetitive and you start to be very physical. It’s very physical, this music. Emma Warren It really is. When we first started talking I asked you about a groove and
it’s not necessarily a groove, but it’s something you can’t help moving to.
There’s a physical response to the music, which is quite powerful. For you as
a performer, do you feel you’re just doing what your body is telling you to do
in the moment of that music? I guess, it’s the opposite of a dance routine. You’re following where your body is taking you in response to the sound. Arturo Lanz The second one. Emma Warren It looks like that. It looks like you’re in a very primal state that you’re in as a
performer. Arturo Lanz It depends on the sound of the state. If the sound is good and powerful, then
it’s very, very good for me. If the sound isn’t good then the concert is very
relaxed. Emma Warren Then we’ll see you in your chair, pressing a few button. Maybe doing a few
formation dance routines. Arturo Lanz Yeah, it’s very physical. It’s not with a laptop – maybe it’s broken by
the end of the concert. You have to consider this, also. Sometimes I broke the
thing. But not with the poses, there’s nothing prepared. You know? It’s natural. Emma Warren So what kinds of things have got broken recently? Arturo Lanz It’s terrible. One Wavestation. Of Korg. This incredible instrument, and I broke it, it’s terrible. Emma Warren How did you break it? Was it just in the moment? Arturo Lanz In Japan, with percussion. [laughter] And then totally broken. But it’s awful ’cause it makes no sense to break it. [shrugs] Emma Warren One thing that occurred to me from seeing your performances is that actually a
lot of laptop performers could learn something from you. Whether or not they
choose to trash their equipment, that’s another thing. But certainly, I’ve not
often seen laptop performers who are able to own the stage or move away
from the laptop. You’ve got controllers. Saverio was using a controller and
you were using one in your performance, moving away from the laptop and
controlling it remotely. It’ll be interesting to see how this generation of
laptop performers start to develop performances that enable them to step away
from the machine and interact with the crowd. Arturo Lanz In our case, Saverio Evangelista is a member of
the group, who is more relaxed and controls the things. But I think things
like Alva Noto is more visual. They play with the visuals, which is
good, but is not my case. We have visuals, but it’s because Saverio likes them
a lot. For me, it’s not important, it’s only the music. Emma Warren Not visuals, just the music. Do you have something else you can play us? Arturo Lanz More music. [loud crash / laughter] Emma Warren Wakey wakey! That was the whole track? [laughter] Joke. (music: Esplendor Geométrico — unknown / applause) Arturo Lanz A lot of the voices I use come from YouTube. This is like a woman screaming. Emma Warren Why do you think aggression is such a powerful emotion in your music? Arturo Lanz Aggression? No, I don’t think it’s aggressive. Emma Warren What do you think it is? Arturo Lanz Aggressive? No, no. Emma Warren Maybe confrontational? Maybe disturbing? What would you say? Arturo Lanz I think it’s nice. [laughter] It’s a work for the peace of the world. [laughs] Emma Warren It really does show how a different set of ears, a different cultural
influence will interpret music differently. Arturo Lanz With this music you can listen with earphones, very loud. You have to realize
every sound of the track is like something for which you must have an empty
mind. Then you can use yourself to jump. But it’s not aggressive. I don’t feel
it’s aggressive. Maybe I’m wrong. Emma Warren That’s one of the beauties of making music, especially something that’s quite
unique, is that it’s going to be accepted differently by different people.
Nobody’s ears hear in exactly the same way, we all perceive things
differently. Arturo Lanz Of course. Plenty of people feel it’s aggressive. But for me, no. Emma Warren Of course. You referred again to this kind of meditative aspect of the music,
so if you put your headphones on and get into it somehow it’ll empty your
mind, it’ll allow you to reach a state of... what? Arturo Lanz An empty mind. It’s very easy with this to have an empty mind. Emma Warren Are you interested in meditation generally outside of music? Arturo Lanz Yes, very interested. Emma Warren Is it something you practise? Arturo Lanz Yeah, I practise meditation. Emma Warren Does it help you with the music? Arturo Lanz No, not really. But my life is also music, and it’s for my life and my music
and the other things that I do. Of course, I’d recommend this to anyone, these
meditation techniques. Very nice. Emma Warren Maybe if you were to offer some tips, some thoughts, to people on how to make
your whole life creative instead of just a portion, meditation would be one
part of that. Arturo Lanz Yes, it’s very creative. Even when you meditate you create things. Emma Warren Anything else you would suggest in order to have a creative life? Arturo Lanz Don’t give any importance to the music. [laughs] I don’t give any importance
to what I do. I think that’s the most important thing. And, of course, it’s
very important for creativity – don’t look for money, for example. Don’t look
to people buying your records. I think this is a very anti-creative thing. Emma Warren So you’re saying, to be creative you need to not attach too much importance to
your music? Arturo Lanz Important for you but not for the rest of the people. Maybe other people don’t
like it. So it’s important for you, but not for the rest of the people. You
have to realize this or you are going to suffer a lot. I do a lot of other
things; music is ten percent of my life. Emma Warren So are you saying if you’re making music you have to make it for yourself and
that’s it? Arturo Lanz Yes. Emma Warren I mean, I know it’s kind of obvious – that’s what everything creative comes down to;
you make it for yourself and if other people like it that’s a bonus. But
sometimes it can get quite complicated, can’t it? If you’re making music and it becomes
your business, it can be hard not to feed the business and make the
music that the business itself requires. Arturo Lanz This is the question. For me, it’s impossible to live with this kind of music.
But I like it. So I have to work on another thing if not. If I have no money
then it’s impossible to make the music. Then I have to work on another thing. Emma Warren Can you imagine not making music? Arturo Lanz No, it’s impossible. After 40 years, 35 years, it’s impossible. Emma Warren How often do you work? Arturo Lanz Every day, every evening. Emma Warren So is it a routine? Maybe after dinner you sit there and make music for two
hours or what? Arturo Lanz Yes, it’s a routine. I use a Mac and now – because before it was impossible – I use Logic and this rhythm machine,
Ultrabeat – I think that’s the name, I don’t know – and it’s a very nice rhythm machine.
You can do a lot of rhythms, very repetitive. If I can stand 20 or 30 minutes of the same, then I consider that’s good. If ten minutes, it starts being boring... Emma Warren So you mean that if you can listen to a piece of music you’re making for 20 minutes… Arturo Lanz More than 20, maybe 30. Emma Warren Then you’ll continue making it. If after ten minutes you’re bored, you’ll dash
it. Arturo Lanz Yes. If it’s boring I won’t finish it. Emma Warren Interesting, this is a very fast work rate. How long does it take you to make
a track? Arturo Lanz Very difficult to say. If after 30 minutes you say it’s okay, then this is the
base of the track. Then I go to YouTube, I put in sounds with synthesizers
that are okay with the rhythm. And I try not to put more the day after. Emma Warren So you’ll leave it. You make the track, go to YouTube, get some sounds, put them on the track. Then once you’ve placed stuff, are you doing anything more to it or are you just saying, that’s it, it’s done? Arturo Lanz That’s it, enough. At the beginning, when I was using the MS-20, the MS-10,
these analog instruments, it was impossible to record, impossible to repeat
the same track. I tried to do the same with the digital, the computer. Emma Warren So you’re taking an analog working practice to a digital environment. Arturo Lanz Yes. Emma Warren Does that work for you because that’s how you used to work? Or does it work
for you because you think there’s a kind of power to things being raw and
unfinished? Arturo Lanz If you start to think or put more things in there, then it makes no sense.
It’s not fresh. This way it’s more natural. Then the next day you have another
track. Emma Warren One thing I think people here might struggle with is to know when a track is
finished. The temptation is to keep working on it and make it perfect and find
this point where it’s done. Your solution is very simple: If you’re bored, it’s no good, and if you can live with it for 20
minutes it’s done. Do you have any suggestions here for how people might know
when a track is finished and to have the confidence to then step away and move
on to something new? Arturo Lanz It’s impossible to give some advice to people because, of course, they will
know more than me with computers and music. Everyone has their way of working
and I think all of them are okay. Emma Warren But do you, perhaps, think part of the reason you’ve produced so much music and
released so much music every decade since your first releases in 1981
is because you know how to finish a track? Arturo Lanz Yeah, maybe that’s the reason. [laughs] Emma Warren I know some brilliant musicians who’ve hardly put out any music because
they’re never content. Arturo Lanz Perfection is a terrible thing. I don’t look for perfection; no matter about
perfect things. Better not to be perfect. Emma Warren I think for some musicians, the quest for perfectionism can be a real curse. Moving on to something
else, you live in Beijing. Some people here might know about the music and culture
you’ll find in that city but I don’t. Can you tell us what attracted you to
live there and what it’s like musically and culturally in that city? Arturo Lanz I live there because I work there in the embassy of Spain. It’s a very
interesting city. I’ve been there 15 years, people are nice, and now the music is
starting to be... it’s like in Spain in the ’80s. There’s a lot of groups doing
pop and techno and noise. I think in two or three or four years there’s going
to be a lot of interesting people there. Emma Warren It’s interesting, again I might be wrong here, because my understanding is
that in Brazil, the tropicália music, which is very beautiful music, was a
reaction to a totalitarian government. It was very subtly against the
government. You could make points, you could speak to people, but you did it
in a very beautiful way. Do you think there’s a point where a totalitarian
government is changing and that’s the point where people want to make music
that’s more powerful? Arturo Lanz No, I think the people making music there aren’t thinking about the change of
government. It’s very free... If you don’t say that the Communist Party is awful, then you can
do what you want. People are not interested in general. Maybe in five or six
years the middle class is going to be more important. The Communist Party is
preparing to change now. I don’t think it’s going to be very violent. Emma Warren So what kind of music have you come across while in Beijing? Are there any
artists or bands you’ve seen perform that you thought were particularly
interesting? Arturo Lanz Well, there is a band, I don’t know if it exist over here, it’s called White.
Two Chinese people, one girl and one man and it’s very interesting music. And
that’s with an MS-20. Emma Warren The wheel has come full circle. Arturo Lanz Yeah, yeah. Then there are people who are extremely noisy, like in Japan, but
even more than Japanese people. Because Chinese people are more radical than
Japanese. Then there are a lot of techno DJs. Some of the best places to go
for DJs are Shanghai and Beijing. It’s a very good market for them. Emma Warren It’s a fully global world, so of course, it’s perfectly natural that young kids in
China will be listening to the same music that we’re all listening to here. Arturo Lanz It was impossible to listen to The Beatles, but now it’s possible. Even if the
social networks are [down] and it’s impossible to go to Facebook or YouTube,
the people have this
VPN. Emma Warren So it’s not officially possible to go to Facebook or YouTube but there’s
ways of accessing the music. There was one interesting thing, which kind of semi-taps into this,
that I heard you say was you make folk music but with electronic instruments.
For instance, in the UK, some people believe that grime music is folk music. But
instead of being an old Irish guy in a pub with a violin, you’re a young guy
from the streets of East London with a microphone. Is that an accurate quote?
Do you believe you’re making folk music? Arturo Lanz It’s more tribal music than folk. It’s not technological music, it’s more
physical. I think it’s very primitive music. If I could do the same with my body and
not use instruments, I think it’s better, but it’s impossible. Emma Warren We’re gonna put it out to questions fairly soon. I guess, you’re saying it’s
primal and physical rather than folk music. Maybe folk is something that
reflects the feelings of the people and tribal music is maybe less conscious. But
are you aware of the influence that your music has had on musicians who are
operating now? Arturo Lanz No. Emma Warren Is that because you’re not interested in perhaps seeing yourself like that? Arturo Lanz No, I’m not interested. I’m not a myth man. I don’t believe in myths. People
say it’s a cool band. For me I don’t believe this. People say everyone had their
influence. But it’s not important who you influence. Emma Warren So I guess what you’re saying is you don’t believe in a mythology of self, a
mythology of you. You just see yourself as real. Arturo Lanz Yeah, yeah. Emma Warren Interesting. That’s quite strong. It’s very easy to get caught up in an idea of
what people think of you, rather than what you think of yourself. Arturo Lanz I don’t care what people think about me. Emma Warren That’s a precondition for creativity perhaps. So, perhaps we should hear
another piece of music. Then we should see what you guys would like to ask. (music: Esplendor Geométrico — unknown / applause) I definitely got that zoning-out thing there. Judging by everyone else there I
think quite a few people did too. So, questions. Can we get the radio mic out? Who’s going first? Audience Member You said you live in Beijing now. Did that change your music in any way? Arturo Lanz Not really. Maybe yes without me realising. There’s no influence from the
place you live, I think. Emma Warren This is an interesting thing, actually. I’ve heard you say you’re not really influenced by anything. Is that the way you prefer to operate, to not really recognize
influences, and instead just to do it less consciously? Arturo Lanz Maybe I’m influenced but I don’t realize. But no, I don’t think living in
Beijing… it’s influencing my life, of course, but I think in Madrid maybe I’d do the same music. It’s not important, the place. It’s inner space. Emma Warren OK, so you make music from an inner space rather than an external space. But do
cities sound different? Does Beijing sound different from Madrid? Arturo Lanz Yes, of course. They sound very, very different. Emma Warren Can you describe the difference? Arturo Lanz The sound in Beijing, you can listen to the sound of the people 24 hours a
day. The scream, the traffic. You have not any place, only in your home that’s quiet.
There’s a lot of noise. Madrid, no, but Beijing is different. In Madrid you
can go to place where nobody else is there. But in China, Beijing, it’s
impossible. Emma Warren I’ve noticed in Madrid a lot of bird song. A lot of bird song in the city. You
don’t have too much of that in central London. Lots of pigeons. Arturo Lanz The pigeons are totally dead from the pollution. Emma Warren The pigeons seem to be the only things that survived in London. Everything
else is gone. Arturo Lanz In Beijing, 75 percent of the days, it would be impossible to go out in Europe.
75 percent of the days in Beijing you would have to stay at home in Europe. Emma Warren You can’t go in the streets? Arturo Lanz It’s impossible because of the pollution. With this level of pollution in
Madrid, they’d close the streets. Emma Warren Seventy-five percent of days. So how do you get to work? Arturo Lanz [shrugs] The people are very strong there. [laughter] Emma Warren The Chinese constitution wins out. Another question. Audience Member It seems like you make a lot of music, you were saying you make it every day. Do you pick what you want to put out? You have so much to choose from. Do you kinda see what
works together? I’m curious how you pick what will go on the record. Arturo Lanz It’s not me, it’s my friends. I send the tracks to them and then they choose
the tracks that are best for them. Audience Member Do you send them everything or a favorite? Arturo Lanz Everything. Audience Member So how much is everything? Arturo Lanz Everything I like; everything I like. Anything where I can stand 20 or 30
minutes with this music. Then I send it to them, they put the name of the
track and they choose the best. Audience Member Do they pick the art as well? Arturo Lanz Yes. Audience Member Must be good friends. [laughter] Emma Warren It’s a very different way of working, isn’t it, to just literally strip out
every other element — the naming of the tracks, the artwork, the selection of
the tracks — all of that you’re not interested in, just the sound. Arturo Lanz Yes. Emma Warren Wow. I don’t think I’ve come across anyone else who works in the same way.
Usually, artists are involved in the other side of it. I think it’s
fascinating. Arturo Lanz I’m not interested in that, only in the moment I do the music. The rest is not
important. If it were not for the people who compile the CD, all the CDs, if
not for them I wouldn’t have any music in the market. Because I don’t need to do this. [holding CD] Emma Warren How does it feel when you get that back? To you, your music is tens of tracks,
20s of tracks, 100s of tracks on your computer. You send stuff off
and it comes back like this with track names and selection. How do you feel
about your music when you see it represented to you like this? Arturo Lanz Sometimes I say [looks at CD] “What is the track ’Presíon’?” I don’t know.
“Cada Día Más”? [shrugs] “Luz De Socorro”? I have no idea. But it’s OK because it’s very
good for the ego. To [bring] down the ego, you know? And you know, the photos are nice. [laughter / applause] Emma Warren You might not be a perfectionist but you are absolutely a purist. Next question. Audience Member How long normally does a track have? How many minutes? Do you think about
that? Arturo Lanz No, I don’t think about it because this CD, one track is five minutes 45, but maybe it’s
12 minutes. The people cut. Audience Member You don’t think about arrangement? Just bounce 30 minutes of music, send it to
them and they just cut the part they like? Arturo Lanz Yes. Audience Member And when you are searching for samples on YouTube, you search them randomly? Arturo Lanz Yes. Audience Member You don’t have a subject? Are you just seeing random YouTube videos and
saying, “OK, I like this, I like this”? Arturo Lanz No, for example, I’ll look for “woman screaming.” Or “Japanese speeches.” And
then this is okay for this track. If not this track, maybe another one. Any
track where you can put the voices that you find on YouTube that’s very nice in the
sound. Audience Member You only search for voices on YouTube? Arturo Lanz Yes. Audience Member Normally your tracks, you don’t know how many minutes you... Arturo Lanz No, because I sample them with a sampler. I use YouTube, then I put in the
sampler and then I repeat. Audience Member And the final track, when you send to the people, how many minutes? Arturo Lanz It depends, around 12, 13, 20. Audience Member They just cut whatever they want? Arturo Lanz [nods] And another thing is, I do a track, then I cut a wave of the track
myself, then I put in a loop, then I repeat for another 40 minutes. Then it’s
20 minutes and I choose one very short loop in the wave and then I repeat again.
This is very repetitive because it’s a repetition of the repetition. It’s very
good. Emma Warren So this will be the basis of a new track? Arturo Lanz Yes. Audience Member You said you work in an embassy in Beijing. How do you manage that dual life,
to make the music work and the work in the embassy, put it all together and
still be as energetic as you are? Arturo Lanz I have to work and my position in the embassy is like a diplomat. My work is
there very silly work, it’s not very difficult. Then two Sundays ago I did a
marathon ’cause I like to run, I like to bike. Sixty percent of my life is
running and the bike, ten percent is music. The rest is staying in the
office and with my children. But now the most important thing is running. Emma Warren But running is also very meditative, isn’t it? Talking about running a
marathon, when you’re running with other people, something happens to heart
rate and blood pressure where you can synchronise with other people. Arturo Lanz Right now every day I run around 15km. Emma Warren Wow. You don’t mess about, do you? [laughter] Arturo Lanz And it’s very good for music, very repetitive. The rhythm of the breath is
like a concert. Emma Warren Do you mean the sound of yourself running is like music to you? Or does it
help you make music when you get home? Arturo Lanz Yeah. It’s better when you don’t think when you’re running, only listening to your
breath. Audience Member Do you listen to anything when you’re running? Arturo Lanz No. Audience Member You’re talking about repetitive music. Do you try to go to some other time
signatures rather than just 4/4 or eight-beat? Do you go five beats or seven
beats? Arturo Lanz No, I don’t think about it. You are from...? Audience Member India. Arturo Lanz Now, I like a lot of Indian music, for example. I hear a lot of this kind of
thing. Can I...? (music: unknown) Audience Member This is the mantra of the nation. Arturo Lanz This is 22 minutes and for me it’s perfect, this kind of thing, very
repetitive. Now this is my influence. Audience Member The word repetition features a lot in your expression. It seems like you’re
saying that life itself brings about a lot of repetitive movements and
thoughts and arrangements in life. So you’re trying to perceive life as such
and then you’re trying to go slightly beyond what everybody perceives to say, “There’s even more if you take time to think about life.” That’s my analysis of
your music. Can you confirm that? Arturo Lanz Yeah, that’s right. The repetitive way of doing things, there’s a moment when
your mind is totally empty and you realize that something is no longer
repetitive. [laughs] Audience Member Actually, you’re right. What makes music interesting is certain parts, either
rhythmically, or a motif repeats, or a tune that constantly repeats and then
it’s harmonised at some point to make the arrangement more interesting. I do
agree to you. Emma Warren Thank you. Do we have any more questions? Audience Member You said you don’t see your music as aggressive, maybe because you don’t make it
in an aggressive state. But maybe it’s the tones and the sounds people that would
see as aggressive. Is there any music out there that you do see as aggressive?
Even if it’s not something that traditionally aggressive to most people, what sounds
offensive to you? What is there about music that you just can’t stand? What do
you hate about some music? Arturo Lanz I don’t hate any kind of music, but I don’t like the music with aggressive
messages against things. Before, yes, when I was listening, it was very good,
but not now. For example, these Nazi groups are awful. This music with racist
messages. It doesn’t matter about the music. The music is okay, but the message...
It’s very dangerous to deliver a message in a song. Even if it’s for peace or
it’s for hate. To give a message, the people who give this message, who are
they? A magician? Nothing is special. No one is special. Who are these people who sing about war?
Who are the Beatles? Who is John Lennon? Audience Member Why should you listen to them? Arturo Lanz It’s dangerous for me to give a message with music. Emma Warren Have you always felt that way? Have you been that way for a long time? Arturo Lanz Yes, a long time. Around 20 or 25 years. Emma Warren Do we have any final questions? No. Well, before we go, I think perhaps could you play us
one more snippet from your new album? We’re going to be hearing you play live
tonight, isn’t it? Do you do any preparations before your live shows? You just go and
feel the power. Arturo Lanz No preparation. Saverio does, but not me. (music: Esplendor Geométrico — unknown / applause)

---

Title: Debbie Harry and Chris Stein
Date: 2015-04-19
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/blondie-lecture/

Debbie Harry and Chris Stein
Emerging from the New York punk scene, Chris Stein and Deborah Harry took the world by storm with their innovative production, sharp image and tales of urban heartbreak. As the songwriting partnership at the heart of Blondie, they penned some of the most definitive songs at the turn of the ’80s, mixing spiky guitars, raw synths, and driving drums that enraptured and inspired kids and rebels around the world. With classic songs like “Hanging On The Telephone,” “Heart Of Glass,” “Rapture,” and “The Tide Is High,” they created their own sound from New York’s melting pot of punk, wave, reggae and hip-hop, all shot through with Deborah Harry's cool soul.
In their 2013 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, the duo recalled New York in the ’70s and ’80s, CBGB, their rise to pop stardom, and more.
Hosted by Benji B All right, it’s a very exciting one today. I’m super excited, I’m sure you are
too. It’s a true New York moment right now. Please join me in welcoming the
amazing Chris Stein and Debbie Harry. [applause] How’re you both feeling? Chris Stein Fine, thanks. Thanks for having us. Benji B It’s our pleasure. Debbie Harry I guess you should turn that off. Chris Stein This place is so opulent. Is all of this paid for by the proceeds of
caffeinated sugar beverages? Benji B Pretty much. Chris Stein Amazing. Benji B Yeah. What did West 18th Street used to look like? Debbie Harry 18th Street? Benji B Where we are right now. Chris Stein He means here. Debbie Harry Oh. Chris Stein Physically, it wasn’t that different. Debbie Harry It was pretty much the same. Chris Stein Yeah, but it’s just the interiors have changed and the quality of the cameras. Debbie Harry Yes, Chris is very impressed with the cameras. Chris Stein You see that red camera? Yeah, those are not cheap. Benji B You were sort of a pioneer of early New York camera stuff, weren’t you? I
mean, you did one of the first, almost like, pirate TV [programmes]. Chris Stein We did this thing called TV Party, which was on
cable TV once a week. Benji B Amazing. Chris Stein And I guess it started in, I don’t know, 1980, ‘79/’80. It went on for four
years. At that point cable TV was only available from 14th Street – no, 23rd
Street uptown, so if you lived below 23rd Street you couldn’t see it anyway.
It was only for the well-to-do. Benji B And what did you do on TV Party? Chris Stein We smoked a lot of weed and went crazy and, you know, just carried on. It was
kind of like going to a club once a week, but everybody just gathered in this
TV studio. Debbie Harry Well, we would start out in the bar across the street and then work our way
across into the studio, so that was always nice. Benji B And what kind of characters did you get to meet on TV Party? Chris Stein Well, everybody was on the show at one point.
Iggy was on and The
Clash, I think. Mick
Jones was on. (video: excerpt from TV Party) Yeah, there we have TV Party outtakes. It’s very entertaining. That’s Glenn
O’Brien, he is the host of TV Party. He’s trying
to revamp it now, it’s out there, and he’s an old guy. Debbie Harry Didn’t Nile [Rodgers] go on one time? Chris Stein Nile was on. Debbie Harry Nile was on. Chris Stein George Clinton, one of his very few TV appearances, was on TV Party. Benji B Didn’t you have a [Basquiat] interview on there as well? Chris Stein Basquiat was on frequently, he did the camera, and those things that Glenn his
holding up, those scribbles are by Jean-Michel probably... Debbie Harry Yeah, those are Jean-Michel. Chris Stein ...are in Glenn’s archives and worth millions of dollars. Benji B So Jean-Michel Basquiat did the titles for TV Party. Chris Stein Yeah, he typed in that stuff. He was frequently typing in that. This was all
very hi-tech at the time. Debbie Harry Typing? That doesn’t look like typing. Chris Stein The stuff, the... Debbie Harry Those are scribbles. Chris Stein No, the overlay. Debbie Harry Oh, that. [laughs] Chris Stein It’s Jean typing that stuff. That was Richie Fliegler, he was in a lot of
bands. That was me with a hood on. This might have been medieval night or
something. This is the compilation that some of these guys from Brink Films
have thrown together. It’s entertaining. Nobody’s familiar with it. Benji B And there was always the famous phone-in part of the show as well, right? Chris Stein We had phone calls, yeah. Debbie Harry And what kind of phone calls would you get? Chris Stein A lot of rude phone calls, but it was great. Debbie Harry Yeah, it was very funny. Benji B So, I mean some of the names that you casually mentioned as we were talking
there, obviously sort of New York legends, folklore almost. Do you want to
paint a picture of what this town was like at the period you were shooting TV
Party? Chris Stein Well, as I was in the car coming here, I looked up the glamour of decay and I
found a lot of different things but no linking theme. I didn’t have enough
time to look on my phone for literary references to the glamour of decay, but
I’m sure they’re out there, and there was something very glamorous about being
in the midst of this, just rot that we were all in, in New York City at the
time. New York city has become the complete opposite animal of what it was. Debbie Harry Yeah. Everywhere I used to go on tour, people would ask me with, you know,
tremblingly ask me, how can you live in New York City? Chris Stein I was hearing that Detroit is going to... they’re actually talking about
selling off the public art collection because they’re in such bad shape, so if
you want to get a glimpse of what urban decay is like now... Debbie Harry ...move to Detroit. Chris Stein Detroit is in kind of poor condition. Debbie Harry There’s a lot of great music there. Chris Stein Yeah, Detroit is awesome. But New York was in the throes of, you know,
everything, back in the late ’70s. Benji B And it was famously declared bankrupt. Chris Stein And famously Gerald Ford, was it, there was a headline that said, “Ford to
City: Drop dead.” Hell, we have the headline, you guys really did your
homework, that’s great. I guess he was refusing some benefit that the
government was supposed to supply, some aid or something was nixed. Debbie Harry It really was like another country. It was a different place than any place in
the States, and now it’s sort of become very acceptable and people come here
to raise families, which was unheard of, really. Benji B Chris, you’re from Brooklyn, right? Chris Stein Yeah, Brooklyn. Benji B And Debbie, you’re from New Jersey originally? Chris Stein North Jersey, yeah. Benji B So what were those sort of original forays into voyaging into New York like
for you as a young person? Debbie Harry It was very exciting. I always wanted to be a part of it and it was an escape
route for me. I always knew that I was not cut out for suburbia and I really
had no interest in that kind of life, although I had great friends there and
lots of good times, lots of laughs, but I always intended to move to New York. Chris Stein When we first started coming in, in the ’60s, it was even before the decline
and the Lower East side was still neighbourhood-y and had immigrant
descendants and it wasn’t the Wild West yet, as it became later in the ’70s. Benji B So when did you first move here, Debbie? Debbie Harry I first moved here in the mid-’60s. Benji B And what were the first kind of jobs that you did when you arrived in New York
to make it? Debbie Harry I just did anything, really. I worked in retail, or actually I worked in a
wholesale market for - I forget the name of the companies - Hold Howard and
Colonial Candle. I sold candles to department stores. I was terrible at it but
they kept me on. [laughs] Chris Stein Didn’t you work for the BBC at some point? Debbie Harry I worked for the BBC after that, as a secretary, and then I worked in the
first head shop in New York City and that was a lot of fun, to meet all the
downtown people and have all of the great psychedelic posters and pipes and
all that stuff. I fit right in over there. Chris Stein The first head shop was on 9th Street and off 2nd maybe? Debbie Harry Yeah, it was right around the corner from where Veselka is now. I think
Veselka might have actually been there. Chris Stein Yeah, I hear it’s been there for a long time. I remember going into the first
head shop. We overlap before we met later on and we both were at Woodstock, at
the festival. Debbie Harry Yes, we’re old people. [laughter] Benji B So the precursor to you meeting, what’s the musical backdrop at this point? Debbie Harry Then? Benji B At that time, yeah. What was the music that you were inhaling and digesting as
a young person? Debbie Harry Oh, everything. We listened to everything. I think radio was very homogeneous.
They played everything, really. Chris Stein Everything wasn’t as genre-specific as it is now, so on the same radio station
you’d hear James Brown and then you’d hear The Rolling Stones. Now it’s gone,
all that, the days of everything being played together, certainly, but that
started going out a long time ago. And we liked the Velvet Underground, we
were all aware of those guys. They showed up in the midst of the flower power
era with this dark record about heroin and death, and it got everybody’s
attention, certainly. Benji B So tell us, how did you guys first meet. Chris Stein You know, it was kind of incestuous, everybody was somehow related to
everybody else on the scene, and I just went to their first show with The
Stilettos, she was doing this
girl trio thing. I ended up going to the first event of theirs and was very
taken with Debbie, I thought she was terrific, and that was it. Then I became
the first non-regular member of the band after that. Benji B Of a band called The Stilettos, right? Chris Stein Yeah, a sort of girl, campy cabaret, R&B thing. Benji B And when you referred to the scene, you said everyone knew each other on the
scene, what was the scene? Chris Stein Just the art scene and the spillover from Max’s Kansas
City, CB[GB]’s hadn’t really started up. It was
going when we first met but it hadn’t really started the ongoing band
situation that came later. The art scene was heavily mixed in with the music
scene. The music scene was still coming out of the West Village with the
remnants of the ‘60s bands, like The Night Owl [Cafe] and The Lovin’ Spoonful
and all that stuff, and the folk music scene. It was maybe more of a small-
town thing. Benji B And there seemed to be sort of a video and film thing happening at the same
time in downtown. There was almost a mini-Hollywood effect going on within
your community, with people like Amos Poe, Jim Jarmusch. Do you want to talk about that
whole scene and how music and film was connected? Chris Stein Well, to me the central milieu was always Max’s. Everything sort of radiated
out from there, because that’s where all the people in the arts met and
collected. Debbie Harry And that was the Max’s from before the ’70s, that later evolved into pretty
much a rock place. Chris Stein A rock & roll club, yeah, when Mickey Ruskin originally owned it. He’s the
guy who invented the velvet rope situation, he was the first one to have
people waiting outside and go, you can come in, you can’t come in. Benji B Is now the right time to show a little clip from one of the films you were in,
Debbie, or do you want me to not do that? It’s Unmade
Beds, one of those movies, just to give an idea of the time. Debbie Harry Amos Poe, yeah, Unmade Beds. Oh, is that Duncan? Chris Stein Duncan Hannah, who was a painter. Debbie Harry Yeah, Duncan the painter. Chris Stein Curse you, YouTube. Debbie Harry We were all such brats, you know? (video: excerpt from Unmade Beds) Debbie Harry Amos thought that he was Godard. [laughter] Chris Stein We got to meet Godard around this period a few years later. We had this idea
to remake Alphaville, so we got to hook up with Godard and he sold us the
rights for a thousand bucks, which we later found out he really didn’t have.
[laughs] I think Amos actually has the contract somewhere, but it never got
remade. Benji B He was talking about pictures in that. You, of course, were a keen
photographer as well, Chris. Chris Stein Yeah, I was at the School of Visual Arts, and I started shooting when I was a
little kid with my little dinky cameras and then I started more seriously
around ‘68. I was just always dragging a camera around. Benji B And you brought some pictures in as well. Chris Stein I have some old pictures here. Benji B These are the pictures you brought in for us today. Chris Stein Yeah, that’s Debbie and Iggy on the Idiot tour in ’77. That’s Debbie in
front of CB’s. Debbie Harry Did we ever find out who owned that car? Chris Stein Nah, I never found any backstory. Debbie Harry That car was always parked in front of CB’s and nobody knew whose car it was. Chris Stein That’s Devo in our hallway. That’s a shot I took with a timer. Debbie Harry Yeah, 105 Thompson Street. Chris Stein Yeah, on Thompson Street, and Clem really doesn’t like that because he has
long hair and he decries his days as a Deadhead. That’s Kim Fowley in Los
Angeles, of The Runaways, the guy who invented The Runaways and many other
things. That’s Lester Bangs in an outtake from ‘Mutant Monster Beach Party’,
which was done for Punk magazine. Debbie Harry That was at Coney Island. Chris Stein That was at Coney Island, yeah. And that’s Eric Emerson and Cecil Coleman;
these guys were in a kind of bridge band that went from the glam New York
Dolls era into the punk era. Eric died early, he was a terrific character. He
was in a bunch of the Warhol films, he was one of the superstarts, sort of. He
was in Heat and Lonesome Cowboys and those suckers. Benji B Debbie’s got the T-shirt. Debbie Harry Yes, I came right from the gym and I loved to work out in my Ramones shirt. It
gives me... something. Chris Stein Richard at his last gig with The Heartbreakers, that’s upstairs at Max’s. Debbie Harry Richard Hell, yeah. Chris Stein And that’s Walter Lure’s hand, that’s one of my favourite pictures of mine.
It’s very noir. And The Screamers from LA. The guy on the left, Tomato, we
knew from the weird sort of shock rock drag scene in New York much earlier,
even before the CB’s scene. He was in New York. And that’s Stiv Bators just a
couple of weeks before he died in Paris. Benji B Going back to The Ramones, and you’ve mentioned “CB’s” at least five times
already, let’s define. You’re referring, of course, to the legendary club
venue CBGB’s in New York. I think it’s worth having a conversation about
CBGB’s and what it meant to you and what it was like. Chris Stein I spent a lot of time there. I have a thing there tomorrow, like I’ve got some
interview with German TV. You know, I haven’t even set foot in the Varvatos
store ever. I will in go in there tomorrow. Benji B Just to define, what are you talking about when you say... Chris Stein Well, CBGB’s is now a clothing store, a high-end men’s clothing store, which
is John Varvatos’s. He’s a really nice guy, actually, I just haven’t gotten in
there. It’s kind of mind-boggling to walk on the block. I used to spend so
much damn time there and now when I walk there it’s kind of disorienting,
because it’s just so different. It’s even hard to see where you are
physically. Benji B So it’s fair to say CBGB’s was really a hub for your scene at that particular
time, I mean your peers? Who were some of the other artists and creatives who
would just be hanging out there every night? Chris Stein Lance Loud, do you know who I mean? Lance Loud was the victim of the very
first reality TV show, I dare say, which was called An American Family,
whereby the cameras followed this family around for years at a time. In the
midst of this show the son came out as gay and this was a real big deal. I
don’t have a timeframe, I haven’t really thought about this, but that was
Lance and he wound up in CBGB’s with a band called The Mumps, right? Debbie Harry Yeah, I think so. It eventually tore up the family, broke up the marriage.
[laughs] Perfect ending, cataclysmic ending. Chris Stein I think they did an HBO documentary about the show, but I’m not sure. It’s kind of obscure stuff. Benji B And everyone refers to CBGB’s as famously being stinky, nasty, smelly, dark. Chris Stein It was pretty nasty and stinky and there were dogs who used to poop around and
stuff, yeah. Debbie Harry I wonder, I’ve heard that there’s a lot of areas or potentially the creativity
of the time in Berlin now. Does anybody know about that, is that reality? Chris Stein Yeah, it’s all happening over there. Debbie Harry It’s pretty cool. Benji B It must have been amazing to feel that momentum. Were you aware of how
significant the momentum that was going on, in and around the orbit of that
club, was at the time? Or was it just a club that you used to hang out in? Chris Stein I think everybody was pretty much in the moment, I don’t think I was thinking
that. Debbie Harry Yes, I think it was a love/hate relationship, and as they say, the best bar or
club is the one closest to home. So, you know, for many of us that was the
truth, that was the reality, that we lived within a five- or six-block radius
of the club. It started out really as a local phenomenon and it just grew,
because we built it through the press. It was very kind of intimate and
personal and the newspapers started covering it and then fledgling managers
would come in and they would try to promote people. It just sort of built up,
it was sort of a natural build, which worked to all of our benefits, because
we were allowed to develop our sounds, our act, our artistry, our thinking in
veritable privacy. We would face the criticism of our contemporaries, which
was often very extreme, but important. That was kind of a real plus. Chris Stein What I’ve always said is, the scene there and in Seattle and in Liverpool and
a few other places really got to ferment for a while before it was jumped on
by the media. Nowadays, as soon as something rears its head even that much,
it’s out there for everybody to see, so I don’t know if that situation can
ever really happen again. Debbie Harry Yeah, this was before cell phones even. Chris Stein Let alone all the rest of this stuff. Certainly, the love/hate thing is,
everybody back then had a real love/hate relationship with the city in
general. I remember everybody was always going, “Oh, I can’t wait to get out
of here, it’s so crummy, it’s so dirty.” That was a constant theme, and now I
wish it was that crummy and dirty again. Benji B Was everyone broke back then? Chris Stein Yeah, the main thing is, it was so easy to live here for no money, it didn’t
cost anything to live here. In the ‘60s there were still apartments, you had
new people who had apartments that cost $20 a month, for a tub and kitchen on
the Lower East Side, single room. You could get $20 a month. It might as well
be 1888, you know? [laughter] Benji B Famously, when you started Blondie you had this top to bottom house almost,
right, you had a creative space that you could rehearse in? Chris Stein We had three floors over a liquor store that we moved into, this crazy friend
of ours was the proprietor. It’s another long incestuous story. So, he wound
up with this three-story loft which he invited us to move into, which was
really nice. Benji B And cheap? Debbie Harry It was cheap, yeah. Chris Stein What was it, like 300 bucks a month or something? Debbie Harry No, it was 100 and a quarter. Chris Stein That was our share. Debbie Harry Yeah, that was our share. Benji B And where was that? Chris Stein 266 Bowery. There’s no landmarking on it. [laughter] Benji B And what kind of area was that, back then? Debbie Harry The guy from The Marbles lives there now. Chris Stein We were in there a few years ago. They sectioned it all off and... Debbie Harry ...ruined it. Chris Stein It’s still kind of wrecked. The top floor... Debbie Harry The top floor is still wrecked. Chris Stein Yeah, it’s still destroyed, do you remember? We wound up in there doing some
TV thing. It’s like some Chinese absentee landlord who doesn’t give a fuck and
is not... Debbie Harry Oh, I thought that woman owned it. Chris Stein Nah, somebody else owns it, some guy. But now it’s right across the street
from the museum of something or other. What is that, down there on the Bowery?
The New Museum, OK, that, so it’s not what it used to be. Across the street
there were just derelict, empty storefronts that all the homeless guys would
live in. Only, in those days you didn’t call them homeless, they were just
bums. Debbie Harry Yeah, they were bums. [laughter] Benji B So you were cold, probably, not much central heating when you were in this
kind of empty space, but what did this space give birth to creatively
speaking? Chris Stein Well, we rehearsed there and did a lot of stuff for the build-up to the first
album. Then we would just go across the street to CBGB’s. It was like one
block below Houston Street and we would just drag this stuff to CBGB’s. At one
point we played at CB’s every weekend for seven months in a row. I remember
noting that at the time. Benji B As Blondie, was your first gig officially at CB’s? Chris Stein No, the first gig with Gary was at...ah, shit, some bar? Debbie Harry The Mushroom? Chris Stein Nah, I can’t remember what the hell it was called. It’s in the book, it’s in
Making Tracks,
there’s actually a photo from it. It was another bar, because there were a
bunch of other places that people played at alternately. Benji B And when you finally did perform at your, sort of home club, CBGB’s, and
you’ve got people like The Ramones or Talking Heads in the audience or
whatever, what did they say after you performed and was that a bit nerve-wracking for you, performing in front of your friends? Debbie Harry No, the band people weren’t that critical. Chris Stein It was just nerve-wracking performing. Debbie Harry It was the other assholes that hung around, they always had something to say.
The band guys were all paranoid about what they were doing, I mean, everybody
was sort of staggering around and trying to figure it out and everybody’s
like, “Oh, yeah, yeah. Nice show.” Chris Stein It’s kind of amazing when you think about going on in this dark, crappy bar
for 20 people and being uptight and worrying about how you’re going to come
off. Benji B So somehow it went from being as hip and cool as you could possibly be, to
now, where we can say that you’ve sold 40 million records, I think the
official statistic is. Debbie Harry That’s a drop in the bucket. Chris Stein We remember what records were. We don’t know what to call it any more. We call
it a collection. Benji B What was the tipping point, the moment when you went from playing for your
mates, basically, in a bar to suddenly being asked to go abroad or being on
tour or having a hit record? Chris Stein It took a couple of years to build up. We went to LA, that was a big deal,
going to LA for the first time. The first gigs we did out of town were Boston
and Philadelphia. Going on tour with Iggy was a big deal. That was pretty
awesome, the Idiot tour. It included Bowie backing up Iggy on keyboards and
singing back-ups, and that was an amazing moment. We were suddenly out in
America in 1977 with that and that was terrific. Benji B And then you had a hit in Australia, right? Chris Stein The hit in Australia probably predated the Iggy thing, maybe. I don’t know the
dates of this shit. Maybe ’76 was the hit and then the other stuff really
started kicking on in ’77, I don’t know. Debbie Harry Well, I’m not good at that. Chris Stein Somebody has to look it up and put it as a crawl, you know? Debbie Harry I mean, it’s important that it was this gradual build-up and I think that’s
what we’re trying to talk about, is that there was this – as Chris says –
fermentation for us and not instant exposure, this kind of worldwide,
manufactured exposure. We really understand how important that was for us. Benji B You had the privilege in a way of controlling your image as well. You seemed
to be aware of the aesthetic of what you were doing through your photography
and presenting that to the world in a way that you wanted it to be
communicated. Chris Stein To a certain extent. I mean, that is the do-it-yourself theme that we’ve
always applied to ourselves. We never had stylists and we never had anything
like that, certainly. Debbie Harry Well, basically it was because it was pre-easy technology. I mean, technology
now has become easy and everyone can experiment and that’s the way that the
process of learning, it’s about experimentation. So we did that in a quiet way
and now people do that in front of millions of people. Whatever you feel
comfortable with or whatever’s available, it’s just part of what we do and the
creative process, or in the process of communication. Communication used to be
very localised in the major cities of the world and now it’s not, it’s
everywhere. I don’t know if it’s good or bad, does anybody? Benji B When you were putting those images out into the world, Debbie, when was the
first time that you realised that you were gaining momentum as this almost
iconic figure in rock & roll, and that the image was a huge part of what you
were doing as well? Debbie Harry I always knew about image being important and was very attached to that as a
kid, looking at other artists and film stars. I always thought, “Well, gee,
that’s great looking, and especially in rock & roll.” It was very visual. If
you didn’t have the visual content, for me, it didn’t really add up. I think
the first time that I ever really realised that this had become something was
not until in the ’80s, when I tried to re-establish my recording career. The
late-’80s, early-’90s, it really was sort of staggering to me that this had
become bigger. I mean, it was just ridiculous that this image thing had really
worked. Benji B A lot of people famously say that without Debbie Harry you wouldn’t
necessarily have Madonna or Gaga or people who have been very image conscious
in the future. But for me, it’s like the music with you guys always came first
and it seemed like the image was an amazing, powerful tool in getting the
music to people. Is that a fair thing to say? Debbie Harry Well, I don’t think one would have worked without the other. For sure the
music was the basis for it, so I think we were dedicated to that. I mean, it
was a struggle to bring the music to the public, so that was actually the
driving force. Benji B Talking of the music, what’s the first song that we should play? Chris Stein Of this stuff? Benji B Is it “X Offender” or “In The Flesh”? Chris Stein The old stuff? Debbie Harry I don’t want to hear it. Benji B You don’t want to hear that? Chris Stein Can you input it later? [laughter] I mean, I like that the stuff doesn’t sound dated, necessarily. Debbie Harry Yeah, it’s OK, it’s cute. Benji B Maybe we should fast forward to “Denis,” which was massive in the UK. No? Debbie Harry No, no, it’s all right. It’s just, you know... Chris Stein “Denis” is always a thorn because it has “Oo-be-do” in the lyrics and it’s
really difficult to go out and sing “Oo-be-do,” for anybody. [laughter] But you could play it, I mean, what the fuck. Debbie Harry You guys sing “Oo-be-do” and see how you feel about it. Benji B What shall we do, “Denis”? When I find the... Debbie Harry No, no, no. Benji B No? Chris Stein She’s not going to want to hear anything. We don’t sit around and listen to
this stuff. Debbie Harry I’ll leave the room and you guys get tortured. Benji B Well, this is significant for more than one reason, because I think it’s fair
to say that this moment in the UK was explosive. (music: Blondie – “Denis”) Debbie Harry [comments over music] Recently I was asked why I didn’t dance, “Why didn’t
you dance on stage on Top of the Pops?” I said, “Well, when we got to Top
of the Pops they would point to places where we should stand and then the
cameras would do all the movement.” So it wasn’t like they would really tape
or film a video performance or any kind of real performance. It was their
performance, it was a Top of the Pops performance. Benji B The clip we’re watching is from a programme in the UK called Top of the
Pops. What’s the US equivalent of that? Chris Stein American Bandstand, at this point American Idol, but everything was always
lip-synced on Top of the Pops. But there almost was no equivalent, because
in the States there’s no national anything, really. I mean, there’s a couple
of TV shows, but there certainly is no national print media the way in the UK
you have Melody Maker and NME and all those things. Everybody in the country
read the New Musical Express, the NME, and it was a taste-making device for
the whole country and everybody saw it all at the same time. There was no
equivalent in the States, certainly, of that. Benji B Well, certainly, the power of the NME in the UK and, of course, Top of the
Pops, which is 7pm on a weekday night. Did you feel the impact of that
straight away when you started touring England? Chris Stein Oh, yeah. At first there was this Blondie-mania moment, with people rushing
the cars and buses and stuff like that, which hadn’t happened in the States. Benji B And did you enjoy that level of attention, Debbie, that sort of cult status
that happened immediately? Debbie Harry I wasn’t really used to it and I had led a much different kind of life. I
wanted to be famous but I wasn’t really aware of what it meant in terms of
curbing my activities. I was used to a much freer kind of life. Benji B And did you find, like lots of musicians and creatives, that it was only when
you left your home town that you were able to really, quote/unquote, ‘blow
up’, as it were? Debbie Harry You mean from New York? Well, you know, it was pretty interesting. We had this
weird thing happening in Australia and we went down there with two guys as our
crew, no manager, no production, and it was pretty funky, it was pretty wild.
We had at that time the hit song of “In The Flesh,” which was a sweet little
old-fashioned song, almost like an Everly Brothers song. (music: Blondie – “In The Flesh”) That’s too loud. [laughter] Anyway, so we got to Australia and they were expecting Olivia Newton-John
singing this sweet little song and various other sweet little songs. It
wasn’t. The whole audience just sort of sat there like this [mouth open],
which was very interesting. We were highly entertained as well. Benji B You mentioned management. Was this the beginning of your career getting
managers, getting record deals and that kind of thing? And what was that
experience like at the height of the mania worldwide? Debbie Harry Well, we did have a manager when we went down there, only... Chris Stein ...he didn’t come. Debbie Harry He just threw us out there with these two guys. Chris Stein But that said, the music business, the touring business in those days was
nothing like it is now. Debbie Harry Now it’s much different. It was going somewhere and just doing a bunch of club
dates, but in another country. Benji B Then famously, once you were with - was it Crysalis, you record label? Chris Stein Chrysalis we wound up on. We were first with a smaller label in the States
called Private Stock,
which was... Debbie Harry ...a hobby, a hobby label. [laughs] Chris Stein Yeah, what do you call it? A vanity project for this guy... Debbie Harry ...Larry Uttal... Chris Stein ...who had been partners with Seymour Stein, and Seymour went on to be much
more of a visionary than Larry. They had been part of, I don’t know, Bell or
Buddha Records and they split up and formed their two labels. Then we got
bought off Private Stock by Chrysalis. Benji B And then the whole A&R thing comes into play and you get sent to a
producer, right, for the first time? We should mention, actually, the other
people in the group at this point. How many are you? Chris Stein Well, we already had a bunch of turnovers, initially. I mean, there’s been a
lot of people in Blondie over the years. We started out with
Fred [Smith] and - Jesus, I mean
there was a lot of people even before the success - and then
Gary [Valentine] is on the first album, and he was a very
charismatic kid by his own right. Then
Frankie [Infante] came in halfway through
the second album, just a lot of people. The main line-up from those days was
Gary and Nigel [Harrison], Nigel who had
played with Ray Manzarek in Nite City, the now-late Ray, who was a really
lovely fellow. Nigel had been in his band, Nigel played bass on the Runaways
record even though it’s not supposed to be him. Jimmy [Destri], who was there early on;
Clem [Burke] who was there very early on, with his drumming. Benji B Talking of drumming, we should talk about the “Heart Of Glass” moment. Is that
the first time you were playing to a click track, right? Chris Stein Well, I don’t know, maybe some of those other songs on the record. That was
the first deconstructed song, I think, as such, probably. I think all the
other songs may have had a full kit and at least a bass and/or rhythm guitar
with it. Benji B And what was the process of making that song? Chris Stein It was just the way people make records now, in pieces. You do a bass drum one
track and you do toms on another track and it’s all pieced together. So it was
challenging, to say the least. (music: Blondie – “Heart Of Glass” live) Benji B This was produced by Mike [Chapman]. How did that work out? Chris Stein Mike is terrific. Mike, I am told, is involved with 70 number one records in
his career, which is a lot. Debbie Harry And many of them he wrote. Chris Stein Yeah, so he was great and it was an eye-opener working with him, certainly. Benji B Is it fair to say it had a bit of a disco-era tinge to it, that record, right? Chris Stein Well, we really thought we sounded like Kraftwerk. We weren’t thinking of
disco at all and it just kind of slotted in there. Benji B But it did become a big record at [Studio]
54
and some of those clubs as well, right? And was it your first number one? Chris Stein In the States, yeah, it was the first American number one, so that was a big
deal. Debbie Harry Yeah, it was a big deal. Mike came to Italy, we were in Milan, and wanted us
to come down to the bar and have a drink and didn’t say why he was there. We
didn’t want to go down to the bar, [laughs] but he insisted that we come
down to the bar. That’s when we found out. Chris Stein Because America is, with all its little regional markets and different tastes
all over the country – it’s still like that – it’s hard to have one thing rise
to the surface, it’s difficult. (music: Blondie – “Heart Of Glass”) Debbie Harry [comments over music] Weren’t we inspired by Giorgo
[Moroder]? Chris Stein We were talking about Giorgo when we did this. We can’t remember, but we
certainly were aware of it. Debbie Harry I know you did a programme with him, right? Benji B Yeah, we were lucky enough to hear from him last
week. He joined
us last Monday, so it’s interesting to join the dots in this era of music.
Obviously, he was doing his work with Donna [Summer]. Debbie Harry Well, the thing that was interesting when we finally met Giorgio and talked
about the writing and the music and everything; he said he had written “I Feel
Love” about five years before he could actually record it and it would be
accepted. Chris Stein In the ’60s no one was ready for it. Debbie Harry And that was the truth for us with “Heart Of Glass.” “Heart Of Glass” had been
around, for us, for over five years. That’s sort of funny. I mean, there was
always this sort of time thing that would happen that doesn’t happen today. Chris Stein But you give us too much credit here. This version we kind of put together in
the studio. Debbie Harry Yeah, this version for sure, but I’m sure that was partially with Giorgo too. Chris Stein I love how this doesn’t sound dated at all. It sounds like MIDI - we all know
what MIDI is? Musical Instrument Digital Interface, which is the language that
all this crap uses to talk to itself and to other things. It sounds like
something like that, only this took days and days to put the track together,
whereas now if you had the idea you could put it together in an hour or so. Benji B How was this received, considering it was a hit at 54 and it was adopted in
much the same way that a Donna Summer record would be, by club DJs? How was it
received by your peers from the CBGB days? Debbie Harry Ah, well... Chris Stein I mean, Joey Ramone saying we sold out is kind of tongue in cheek, really. I
don’t know if he was really seriously pissed off about it. Debbie Harry Did Joey ever get seriously pissed off about anything? Chris Stein That’s something else too. Yeah, you know what. Debbie Harry One thing. Now what was I going to say? Oh well, must have been a lie. [laughter] Benji B I wanted to talk to you about tapping into New York musical culture as well,
because obviously this does have a tinge of that era of club record, and then,
of course, from my generation one of the most famous lyrics of all time is,
“Fab 5 Freddy says everybody’s fly.” I just
wanted you to talk about the
“Rapture” moment, really,
because I think it’s probably fair to say that you’re the first group with a
popular reach that introduced rap on a record. I mean, certainly I think it’s
fair to say you introduced the idea to a worldwide public, or a pop public
perhaps, that hadn’t yet had the opportunity to come into contact with New
York hip-hop culture. How did you meet Fab 5 Freddy? Chris Stein Probably from TV Party, around there maybe. Yeah, I think he showed up... Debbie Harry Either CB’s or TV Party. Chris Stein Yeah, I think it was TV Party. Debbie Harry He was a very entrepreneurial character and just was adventurous and he likes
connecting the dots. He was all over and he is still today, totally. He’ll
call me up and say, “Well, what about this?” and I say, “Fred, how did you
know this?” He’s sort of, two seconds after something happens, he knows. Chris Stein So in 1977 he took a bunch of us uptown to the Bronx, to a Police Athletic
League, which is like a youth centre, a neighbourhood youth centre, and we saw
this big event, this big rap event, which was super exciting. It was just
phenomenal and it was a game-changer for me, certainly. I saw that it was
paralleling what was going on downtown, but we didn’t know much about it. Benji B Can you describe the event, what it looked like? Chris Stein It was like a gymnasium-type thing with a stage and it wasn’t just a gig by
one group, it was a bunch, it was kind of a festival where there were a bunch
of groups, [Grandmaster] Flash and the Funky Four, and maybe Cold
Crush, I
can’t even remember. I was talking to Charlie
[Ahearn] about it, actually, he had a memory of it
too. I think he may have been with us. Debbie Harry Yeah, I think so. Chris Stein I can’t remember what he said now, because it’s also the 30th anniversary of
Wild Style, which was the
first hip-hop film ever made. And it was just terrific, the energy level was
amazing. Benji B Perhaps it’s not for me to say, of course, but I always got the sense that you
were very much respected among the hip-hop community, because you were
celebrating and crediting what you were tapping into as opposed to taking it.
It’s like, you put a lot of people on an international stage, of course,
including Flash, which is probably the first time I saw him in a video. Debbie Harry Well, it’s a double-edged thing. Chris Stein Am I right in thinking you flew out Kurtis
Blow to the UK, as
well? Debbie Harry Yeah, I think so, yeah. Chris Stein You remember that? I can’t remember it. Debbie Harry And we had Funky 4 +
1 on Saturday Night
Live and that was quite an achievement. They were paranoid. [laughter] Chris Stein That was the first rap act on American TV, I think, either national or local,
and they still put them on at the credit crawl at the end of the show. They
didn’t know what to expect. Debbie Harry Then they fell in love with them. Benji B Maybe you can talk us through who’s in this video. (video: Blondie - “Rapture”) Debbie Harry [comments over music] Now this guy was supposed to be - what is his name,
Samedi? Chris Stein I think it was Baron Samedi, lord of the graveyards in voodoo culture. I think
this guy was Haitian and he was actually a great dancer. Debbie Harry Yeah, and he brought in... Chris Stein He had three girls who were... Debbie Harry Two girls, three girls? Chris Stein Three girls, yeah, and one of them sort of became possessed in the midst of
the filming and they had to carry her off and revive her. They were used to
going into that sort of trance state when they were dancing. I think it wasn’t
so much our influence. Debbie Harry OK, that’s enough of this, all right? [laughter] You know, the rap thing is more of a tribute than an actual thing. Chris Stein It’s an homage. Debbie Harry It’s not really very good. I mean, it was interesting to a lot of people, but
I think that the real rappers were a little bit uptight, pissed off about it,
initially. But I will say, this is the first rap song that had its own song,
its own music, because up until then they were scratching and taking licks
from Chic and everything. This had its own embodied theme as well. Chris Stein My wife just told me that the Beastie Boys’ first album, had they had to pay
for the samples, would have cost like $10 million or something like that.
That’s Basquiat. Debbie Harry That’s Jean-Michel Basquiat. Chris Stein Probably his only rock video appearances. Debbie Harry OK, come on. I’ll smash your computer, I will. [laughter] Chris Stein That’s Lee Quinones, also known
as LEE, a really great, brilliant graffiti artist. Debbie Harry I don’t know who that guy is. [laughs] Chris Stein Yeah, I don’t know who that guy is. Debbie Harry Well, it was fun to do anyway. Benji B All right, well, even if you don’t like it, we’re going to give you a round of
applause for that, OK? [applause] Benji B So where are we at in the timeline of Blondie for a moment? Do you mind me
raising the fact that you were also a couple at this stage? Chris Stein Yeah, we were hanging out a lot. This is from
Autoamerican,
which had this and “The Tide Is High” on it, and famously when we gave the
record to Chrysalis they said, “We don’t hear any singles on this record.” [laughter] Debbie Harry They said that about Parallel Lines too. Chris Stein But that’s what record companies do. I mean, record companies were and are
inherently evil. [laughter] Debbie Harry Anybody here from a label? Bless you. Chris Stein I shouldn’t make a broad statement like that, I’m sure there are some indie
labels... Benji B Well, if anyone is qualified to talk about the highs and lows of the music
industry, it’s definitely you guys. I mean, it’s relevant, obviously we’ve got
a room full of musically-minded producers, DJs, singers, artists. You
definitely had a rough ride with management and money and accounting
experiences, is that right? Chris Stein Well, the main thing was that the two years we made the most money, our
accountant decided not to pay our taxes, because those were the days of tax
shelters and loopholes and trying not to pay taxes, even on a non-Apple,
Amazon level. Debbie Harry Also, we were extremely bad business people. We really didn’t pay attention to
it, or were very interested in it, so we trusted our management to take care
of things. I think now people are much more knowledgeable. Record companies
now want a percentage of everything you do, I mean, that’s rough too. They
take a percentage across the board of tours, merchandise, records or CDs.
Whatever income’s coming in, they are entitled to some of it, which is kind of
gross. Benji B It is definitely a relevant subject to talk about, because we mentioned 40
million records at this stage in your career. Definitely, you were hitting 20
million records worldwide, yet parting ways with a manager. How is it that you
can have 20 million records on the board and not be paid right? It’s amazing.
For us, we sit here and go, yeah, Blondie, Debbie Harry, Chris Stein,
superstars, but there’s definitely been low points where you’ve had platinum
discs on the wall I imagine and not... Debbie Harry Even funnier was when “Heart Of Glass” was at number one, we were on
suspension, which means that we hadn’t fulfilled the obligations of our
contract. So we had a number one record and we were also on suspension. The
whole thing of it was mad, it was really mad. Chris Stein It all goes back to the surf mentality. The Brill Building, does anybody know what
that was? It was a building in New York where all the old songwriters would
collect and write and do their work out of. It all kind of represented the
corporate aspect of the music business at the time, with publishing meaning
paper publishing, physical objects and such. It was kind of a surf mentality
where you were working for the record company rather than with them,
certainly. Benji B It might be an oversimplified question, but if you could impart one bit of
knowledge about what you’ve learned from the bad bits. Chris Stein Oh, just don’t trust anybody. I mean, what the fuck. The big thing was having
somebody come along and go, “You can trust me, son,” and do that thing, and
then you’re fucked from there on, you know? [laughter] Debbie Harry There is more information now, so that’s very good. Chris Stein Yeah, at that point the guy we had for a lawyer went on to write textbooks
that are used in entertainment law classes, and I don’t think there were
entertainment law classes in the ’70s, it just didn’t exist. Debbie Harry So you can image how people before us really never saw [proper compensation].
I mean, you hear stories like that all the time, right? Artists from the ’50s
and the ’60s that never saw a nickel. Benji B Talk to me about the cover of Parallel Lines. Debbie Harry Well, it’s what it is. It’s nice. It’s OK, black and white. If the music
hadn’t happened I don’t think it would have stood out particularly as great
art or hugely interesting. It just became very popular, so the artwork meant
something. Benji B I can’t think of another popular rock & roll group that’s a band of guys
with a female front vocalist. Has that ever happened before or since? Chris Stein Gladys Knight & The Pips. Benji B I guess. Rock & roll, though? Debbie Harry Did you ever see when The Pips performed without Gladys? Chris Stein Yeah, they were called And The Pips. [laughter] Debbie Harry It’s great, it’s so great. Chris Stein It’s great, they just do the back-ups for “Midnight Train,” you know? Debbie Harry They just do the back-ups, it’s fabulous. “I heard it...” Yeah, it’s really
funny. [laughter] Benji B So at this point in your career there’s loads of people around you who you
couldn’t trust, but you definitely have always trusted each other. We don’t
want to pry too much, but it’s beautiful to have such a creative soulmate
partnership that’s lasted to this day. Maybe you can talk to us about working
with the person closest to you. Chris Stein Oh, with Debbie, we just have a lot of unsaid communication, a lot of non-
verbal stuff goes on. I don’t have to ask her much because she always will
have the same conclusions. Debbie Harry Yeah, and sometimes he’ll... most recently, there were a couple of lines in a
song that he came up with, and then there were two more lines that had to be
written, and I had already written them. So I mean, it just sort of happens.
It’s easy for us. I mean, we certainly have had our disagreements and battles,
but not so much recently. Chris Stein No, we get along pretty good. Benji B And do you mind, Chris, talking about the period in your life when you fell
ill? Chris Stein No, I just had this weird illness, which is genetic, I’m told. You have to be
of Mediterranean, Eastern European origin, and I was doing so many fucking
drugs I just wore myself out and really lowered my immune system. And this
thing came up and it took a couple of years to get rid of. It was annoying but
interesting. Benji B And am I right in thinking, Debbie, that you put things on hold for yourself
as well in order to...? Debbie Harry Well, I don’t know. I really had no super-ambition to be a solo artist. I
always like the idea of working in a group, in a band, and I loved
collaborating with Chris, so... I mean, simultaneously – let’s figure out the
rest of this now – we got dropped from our label. Chris Stein Yeah, we were at a low point. What is this, ’82? Debbie Harry Chris got sick, our financial manager did not pay our taxes, all of this. The
bottom fell out and so I probably wouldn’t have been able to continue. I was
swamped in this mire of complicated, disgusting issues. Nowadays, one of my
favourite things to say to people is, don’t forget to take a vacation, because
we worked non-stop for seven years under extreme pressure, and Chris started
his own label and he was producing artists, and we were doing a lot of stuff
without stopping. And stopping is very important, so it shows that we were
forced to stop. They said, stop, and that’s basically what happened. Benji B And you’re still sitting on the sofa together. Chris Stein Well, yeah. It is what it is. Debbie Harry Don’t press your luck! [laughter] Benji B I don’t want to cliché too much the ’70s and ’80s drug thing, but it is a
relevant sort of sidebar to the timeline of some of the ups and downs of the
group as well. How much did that have an effect on not just you guys and your
personal relationship together, but the whole ensemble? Debbie Harry I think everybody was taking drugs. It was socially [accepted], that was it,
that was what was going on. I don’t know what’s going on today, really. I
think people experiment and try things. I don’t know, I don’t see people being
constantly involved with drugs. It’s perhaps more of a party thing. Chris Stein I’ve always thought that my parents’ generation had absolutely, really zero
information about drugs, that we growing up never heard anything about it –
except that, OK, this might be fun or it seems like it should be amusing or
whatever – so that was it. The ravages of it weren’t as apparent as they are
now, certainly. Benji B Let’s play another song. Shall we play “One Way Or Another” or shall we play
“Call Me”? Chris Stein Yeah, I mean “Call Me” is good if you want Giorgio. (music: Blondie – “Call Me” / applause) [Debbie and Chris have an aside] We were talking about Liberace and the HBO thing [Behind the Candelabra], that’s all. Benji B Is it good? Chris Stein Yeah, it was awesome. Benji B Michael Douglas, right? Debbie Harry Michael Douglas and Matt Damon. Chris Stein I think I saw people complaining that Matt Damon was too old to play a
teenager, because the guy was like 17. I thought the make-up was fucking as
good as the walking dead, it was amazing, the stuff they did. Benji B What made you think of that during this song? Chris Stein Nothing. [laughter] Giorgio, yeah. Giorgio was the opposite of Chapman. He wanted to just do
everything as fast as possible, so we just went in there, did a couple of
hours with him. I think he redid some of the parts with his guys and that was
it. Benji B Fast-forwarding a little bit, once you’ve got through and you’re back on track
after being sick, you reformed Blondie but with a slightly different cast. I
mean, I don’t want to dwell too much on the negative stuff, but for people who
are just starting out in music it’s definitely worth not ignoring the possible
things that can happen when you fall out with people, or things don’t work out
with other band members and stuff. Maybe you could talk to us about that
experience in a positive way, what you can draw from it? Chris Stein Oh, I don’t know. We had been working with Leigh Fox for years. I mean, he’s
been working with us for 20-odd years at this point. Debbie Harry Really? Chris Stein Yeah, we’ve been working with him since god knows when. So, I don’t know, I
tried to work with Gary again. Gary and I were always friendly except when we
were in a working situation when we would bump heads. It didn’t seem to work
out. Maybe it’s my fault, maybe it’s his fault, it’s hard to say. We didn’t
really think about using Nigel and Frankie again. Debbie Harry It’s very difficult to keep an ensemble together, especially if you’re sharing
a partnership. We were all partners in a corporation as well. Chris Stein The band situation is fairly democratic. You have to have a vote, get out-voted and stuff like that. Debbie Harry It’s one of those things. I mean, when you work on a film you’re working with
people for six weeks, two months, three months at the outside usually. Even in
that short situation, even in the run of a play, there’s things. Egos get in
the way and it doesn’t work. After how many years, forget it. Sometimes it
just wears itself out. I mean, friendships come and friendships go, and you
mature in different ways at different timing. That’s just life, right? Benji B It’s clear that you two are the creative nucleus of Blondie, but what is the
creative process? Do you like being in the studio, do you spend a lot of time
there? Maybe you could just give us an insight into how you make music
together? Chris Stein Well, it’s been changing all the time with technology now. I say I’m glad that
we were at the height of analogue recording and we got to experience that, but
I really enjoy working with the modern stuff, with the computers. Just working
the way it is, it’s much more intuitive once you get it going. There’s a lot
of people involved, I think there are more people involved with this last
thing that we’re wrapping up now than ever before. We have more outside
influences and individuals coming into the whole project. Debbie Harry I will say that Chris was into computers at a very early time, with the Amiga
and Compuserve, right? Was it Compuserve? Chris Stein No. You see, her computer skills are like... Compuserve, no. We had Amiga’s
early on, which was a Commodore, is that what you’re trying to say? Debbie Harry Oh, it was a Commodore, right. But Compuserve was a network, like AOL or
something, right? Chris Stein Maybe. I remember the onset of email. Debbie Harry Yeah, you used to get it on the phone. Chris Stein With dial-up, right. I remember the onset of email, and if I had any brains I
would have bought all those great domain names, but what can you say. Debbie Harry You’re a failure. [laughter] Benji B And what’s the process now? You’re working on a brand new record, what’s the
process? Chris Stein Yeah, we’ve just finished a bunch of stuff. Benji B What do you do in the studio, Chris? Chris Stein Me? I sit there now and I do a lot of programming and I make a version of the
song, somewhat, and then I send it to my producer, and he replaced some parts,
and then we all got together later on in the process, and replaced more parts.
But at this point every song has some of my little synthesizers and things on
it that we started out with. Debbie Harry Yeah, he comes up with some nice sounds. Benji B And Debbie, have you enjoyed this new bout of touring as much as you did the
first time around? Do you still get a kick out of touring and performing? Debbie Harry Well, yeah, I mean, that’s what I do. That’s what I’ve wanted to do and
trained myself to do. And I still learn things from it, so it’s not like I
walk out like a zombie or a robot. It’s something that’s an experience that I
learn things from all the time. I mean, technically it’s become a lot easier
for me, with in-ear monitors and the sound equipment. Everything has improved,
the technology has really improved, it’s great. Chris Stein Yeah, the whole thing is much easier. Benji B Do you want to play something from this new material? Chris Stein Sure. What have you got? Play “Drag You Around.” I’m hearing that radio is
responding to this track. [laughter] Benji B And this is brand new from... when was this recorded? Chris Stein Over the course of last year. (music: Blondie – “Drag You Around”) Debbie Harry This is not mastered. This is a mix, not a master. [applause] [photos show on screen] Benji B I love the way that when I’m playing it, we’re just putting pictures up and
there’s a casual, “Yeah, yeah, that’s the painting...” Do you have that in
your house, the original of this? Debbie Harry I do. Well, he made a lot of them, but I have a copy, yeah, fortunately. Benji B And this is the Warhol photograph of you, right? Debbie Harry Yeah, I think so, one of them. Yes, that’s my ‘secretary with attitude’ pose. [laughter] Chris Stein That song was written by a guy, a friend of ours from New Zealand who’s named
Matt Barus, and he has a group called The Dukes, which is a very cool band
from down there. Benji B Well, I’m conscious that we’re going to run out of time and I know that
there’s going to be a lot of questions from the room, so if you’re happy I
think we should hand over the mic to the floor and try and take as many
participant questions as we can before we run out of time. Audience Member Well, first of all, thank you for being here. Urban folklore has it that Mr
Stein, you were quite instrumental – you just mentioned the 30 year
anniversary of Wild Style – in securing the funding for that project. And if I
heard the story correctly, a German state television agency, which at the time
was probably the most conservative broadcasting entity in the world, was
instrumental too. Chris Stein Now, this is all beyond my ken here. I’ve never really heard any of this
stuff. Debbie Harry This is Charlie’s stuff. Chris Stein Yeah, I’d have to ask Charlie, Charlie Ahearn. Debbie Harry The Akademie der Künste was very not conservative, I found at that time. Chris Stein But I don’t know if that’s what he’s referring to. Participant Apparently the ZDF, the German state television, funded Wild Style and
rumour has it that you were the one making the link. Chris Stein No, I was just there in a musical capacity. That was it for me. Debbie Harry See how these lies start? [laughter] Audience Member But that’s what this forum is for, we can finally get it straight. Chris Stein I don’t think they had too much money at all. Audience Member In a roundabout way it was like, thanks for being somehow involved in that and
bringing that to the world. Chris Stein Yeah, Wild Style is great. Debbie Harry You could look up Charlie. Chris Stein Charlie Ahearn, he’s still kicking it with Wild Style. They have the 30th
anniversary. They’re doing a special pressing – I think they’re pressing each
one of the tracks separately to be used for mixing, scratching, whatever. Audience Member On the rumour note, Mr Moroder last week said that you were not actually quite
happy with “Call Me” and were not really liking to perform it. Debbie Harry Oh, no. Our keyboard player downright flatly refused to play it, because they
replaced his part. He was very insulted by that. Chris Stein Yeah, I mean Giorgio was Giorgio. It was Giorgio and he had two guys, one was
an engineer and the other was a guitar player and keyboard player, and I’m
sure they replaced a bunch of our parts. We may have made up and influenced
the parts, but I think they were refined by some of those guys. Clem is
definitely on there, that’s for sure. Beyond that I can’t say for sure,
because we just worked with him very quickly, worked up a version of the
thing, and then he said OK and the next thing we know we heard the finished
product. I know it’s his synth guys on there, it’s his standard sound. Benji B Next question? Don’t be shy. I was shy at the beginning. Debbie Harry They’re sick of us already. Audience Member This question’s for Blondie. Is it true - and if so, can you talk a little bit
about it - did you once upon a time hitch a ride from Ted Bundy. Debbie Harry So, supposedly, yeah. [laughter] Chris Stein We will never know if it was actually Ted Bundy. Participant Well, I know he had lots of different disguises. Chris Stein The guy she hitched a ride with had the same M.O. Debbie Harry I thought you were going to ask me about my moustache. Benji B Any more questions? Can we go to participants first? Participants, now is your
time. Debbie Harry I have to say that I received a track today from a Turkish couple, sent to me
by Rainer [Lingk] from Die Haut, so I was very excited by that. Chris Stein Did you like that? Debbie Harry Yeah, I’m looking forward to us sort of branching out. I’ve always been
curious about working over there and meeting people from areas of the world
where the music stems from a different place. Audience Member I want to ask about the song “The Tide Is High,” which was originally sung by
a reggae band called The
Paragons, who are actually not
that mainstream. How did you go about picking that song? Chris Stein I had gotten a compilation record from a friend of ours who’s a writer, just a
reggae compilation record. That one track really stood out and the original is
amazing. If anybody hasn’t heard it, I really recommend digging out the old
version. It’s got a violin on it, so all the horn lines are based on the
violin lines. It’s really weird for a reggae track from the ’60s to have a
violin on it. Debbie Harry And it has beautiful harmonies. Chris Stein Yeah, it’s great. Participant Did you have any other reggae interests or artists that you liked at the time? Chris Stein Yeah, I was always a total reggae buff. We were criticised on the last record
for having too many reggae songs. (music: Blondie – “The Tide Is
High”) Debbie Harry Well, I just want to congratulate you all for getting this opportunity,
presented from Red Bull. I guess it was a contest of sorts? Chris Stein Are you guys from out of town? [laughter] Benji B All over the world. Debbie Harry Fantastic. Chris Stein Toots and The Maytals should be in the rock & roll hall of fame, it’s
pathetic. I mean, among many others, but that one is my favourite peeve. Those
guys are so influential, that body of material is amazing. Audience Member Thank you again for being here and sharing with us. I wanted to know, was it
challenging to be a powerful woman in rock & roll, and how did you deal with
criticism over the years? Debbie Harry [laughs] Oh, god, not very well. I don’t know, I probably didn’t feel
particularly powerful. I was struggling with my own inner demons. But I think
that I had determination, I had an excellent partner and friend, so I got
lucky. But criticism, I know that after one of the trips to the UK in the
early days, I think I stayed in bed under the covers for a couple of weeks,
after being written about in every possible way. It was too much. I guess you
learn to deal with it and one of the things I learned was not to read
criticism while I was working or on the road, or just let it go and not be
bothered with it. Chris Stein Yeah, now we’re in the era where there’s no such thing as bad publicity, I
think that’s more in play than ever before. All the people having nervous
breakdowns in the media, and that still manages to elevate them and get them
another 150,000 followers on Twitter. Debbie Harry And I will say, now, that my perspective, if I read some kind of criticism, it
gives me an understanding of the person who wrote it. Chris Stein But that’s it. I think people gravitate towards negativity. I find that if I’m
reading 800 Facebook posts saying how great we are and then one guy writes,
“You suck,” then that affects me more than the other 799 saying how great we
area, so it’s weird. Audience Member Interesting enough, punk is always viewed as being a British thing by
mainstream media and in the reflection afterwards. What would you say that you
guys from New York were different from the lads in London at this time in the
’70s. Chris Stein Well, the British punk scene was genuinely more politically motivated than in
New York, where it was more of a social phenomenon, I think. Recently, we just
saw Vivienne Westwood coming to the Met Ball and she was making a political
statement about some soldier who was being wronged over there, so she has
maintained her [political stance]. Debbie Harry Yeah, it was very political in the UK. Chris Stein To me, that was always the biggest crossover. The Ramones are singing about... Debbie Harry ...mental problems. Chris Stein Mental problems, this and that. Johnny Rotten was singing about anarchy, so
there was a maybe a different worldview from the two things. I’m not sure
which influenced the other, really. We know that Malcolm came and saw the [New
York] Dolls. Benji B Malcolm McLaren? Chris Stein Yeah. Malcolm put some of those elements of the [New York] Dolls and
Television on the Sex Pistols. Debbie Harry In a way I think it’s probably pretty close to being the same thing. I mean,
we approached it from the perspective of social issues, which comes down to
being affected by politics. Chris Stein But also, here in New York it was a musical backlash against all the mediocre,
MOR music that was going on in the ‘70s, too. Benji B And did you see those people as your contemporaries, overseas? Did you have a
creative relationship of any kind with Vivienne and Malcolm and all that? Chris Stein Well, the guys from The Damned we were always friends with, different bands. Audience Member Hello, thank you for being here. So, I came from Chile and in my country one
of the most legendary dance clubs is called Blondie, in tribute to you. Have
you heard about it? And I’m asking, is that a good example of the legacy of
Blondie? Debbie Harry Cool. [laughter] Audience Member Have you heard about this story? Chris Stein That we’re popular in Chile? Yeah. Debbie Harry No, no, this is another band in Chile named Blondie. Benji B A club, a club, a whole venue. Debbie Harry We’re going to have to go get them now. Chris Stein No, I haven’t. What do they do? I’m a big fan of Latin music these days. Audience Member Sorry, again? Chris Stein Is there actually another Blondie band in Chile? Audience Member No. Debbie Harry Ah, I thought you were talking about another band. Ah, the hell with it. Chris Stein We don’t get down there much, it’s ironic. Debbie Harry We’ve been there a couple of times though. Chris Stein We have two Spanish language tracks on this record coming out, so we’ll see
what happens – not completely, but we have Spanish, Latino guest artistes. Debbie Harry From Systema Solar... Chris Stein ...who are from Colombia, and Los Rakas from Oakland. Debbie Harry From where? Chris Stein Oakland.
[laughter] Debbie Harry Oakland? They’re Mexican originally. Benji B Well, it’s been a great privilege for me to sit alongside such legends and for us
all to have such an education today. Thank you so much, Chris Stein and Debbie
Harry. [applause]

---

Title: Bootsy Collins
Date: 2015-04-19
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/bootsy-collins

Bootsy Collins
He may not be the Godfather, but Bootsy Collins sits at the center of funk’s engine room. First with James Brown, then with Parliament-Funkadelic, his were the basslines that fueled the grooves that have kept modern music bumping. From Cincinnati to stages worldwide, Collins embraced the potential of the music he was a part of and in the process became one of funk’s best-known and loved representatives.
In this lecture at the 2011 Red Bull Music Academy, he retraces his early steps, recalls the J.B.’s military discipline, the liberation of P-Funk and explains why Jimi Hendrix was the inspiration for it all.
Hosted by Noz Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. As you might have noticed we’re in the
presence of a funk legend. Give a warm welcome to Mr Bootsy Collins. [applause] And Bootsy’s prepared a video introduction to his life and legacy. [video plays / applause] So let’s start at the beginning – Cincinnati, Ohio. What drew you to music growing up there? Bootsy Collins Well, my brother played guitar. He’s eight years older than I am, Catfish Collins. I was just a young,
long-haired sucker that looked up to his brother, didn’t have a father in the
home. You know how young boys look up to their brothers and want to be like
them? I wanted to be like my brother. That’s what really inspired me – him. You didn’t get music like you get it
today, it was kind of far and in between. First of all, we didn’t have a
radio. You’d hear music coming from a club or the house of someone who could
afford a radio or record player. So, we just had to get music however we could
get it or listen to it however we could hear it. Every now and then, my brother
would come and practice at the house, and that’s where I witnessed music
firsthand and how it affected people. I wanted to be like that, I wanted to be
cool like that. Musicians were just cool, man. Especially the jazz players, they were
really cool. They had such an air about them. Not only my brother, there was
this guy called Wilbert Longmire. He was a jazz player
out of Cincinnati, Ohio, he became really big. He was bigger than George Benson. George Benson took what
he was doing and just blew it all the way up. But Wilbert was a local guy who
could play like that, but never stepped out. We’ve got a lot of those
musicians, who are great at what they do but get distracted by the home life,
different things, they’d get a little distracted and
so you don’t step out. So, he didn’t step out and George Benson stepped out and
just smashed. We were a local band that decided to step out and the way I got
to be with my brother was I had to prove to him that I was worthy. You know, because big
brothers are just, “Ah no, you get out of here.” I was young. I was nine, I
started messing around with the guitar when I was nine years old, and I
started sneaking my brother’s guitar when he was on his paper route. So, while
he was gone, I’d get my brother’s guitar out the closet, but the deep thing
unbeknown to me was, he knew how he had his guitar packed. Any little move
he’d know someone had been messing with his guitar. You don’t funk with
nobody’s funk. I found that out later. So, I was sneaking in there and he’d
come back and, “You been messing with my guitar?” “No way, I know that’s
taboo.” So, I would never mess with his guitar – that’s what I told him. Then
one day he came back early and I was in there jamming like a mother, just
jamming all by myself. I was hearing stuff in my ear, didn’t pay no attention
to the door. And him and his band walked in while I was jamming and he didn’t
even say nothing. He just had this look in his eyes and I knew it was over for
me. Sure enough, he started choking me [laughs]. Thank god momma came home
right then, “Boy, what you doing?” She grabbed him off me. My mother saved me,
that’s why I’m with y’all today. It was really wild, but that’s when I knew I
gotta get me a guitar. I gotta get me something to play. Musicians at that
time were really personal about their instrument. Nobody touches nobody else’s
instrument. You don’t disrespect a person by walking in the room, seeing his
axe there and going over and touching it. You didn’t do that. That was family,
you don’t mess with that. So, I learned that. But from there, I had to prove to
my brother that I was worthy of playing with him, because that was my dream.
Not to play with any big star, I wanted to show my brother that I could play with him. I wanted to please
him. So that was my mission. I got one chance; you never get a second chance
to make a first impression. That’s what I want to leave you with. Your first
impression is the one; you can’t count on nothing else. So, I knew this early,
and I knew whenever I showed up, I had to wear you out. I had to give it all.
That one shot you get. Getting with my brother, to me, was that one shot. So I
did everything I could do to please him and show him I could do this. When I
did that, the first night we played together, the club was about half the size
of this. We played there, the place was packed, everybody was drunk, everybody
was up in your face, breathing. But everybody was having a great time. I was
killing them, because I was the youngster. I’m the young mug on the stage and all
the chicks… [screams] I’m like, “Yeah, I like this.” So, once my brother saw
how much nerve I had and I didn’t care – I just wanted to play. It wasn’t
about no money, it was about nothing but playing. That’s all it was about to me.
He saw that and from that day on I played with my brother Catfish. Noz What styles of music were you playing back then? Bootsy Collins Anything we heard. There were a lot more instrumentals back then. I heard a
guy, Lonnie Mack, I don’t know if you ever heard of this guy? Lonnie Mack played guitar and he was like
a country-folk-western-funk mesh combo. It was just funky, man. There was no
singing, just him playing guitar, and the style of guitar he played, I just
loved it. My brother loved it, and we played all the Lonnie Mack-type records.
Then we had to play all the top stuff on the radio. Later on, we figured out
how to play the stuff on the radio, but to us that wasn’t fun. For us, what was fun
was coming up with stuff that we could play and watch people say, “What the hell
is that?” And we got off on that and that kind of lasted on through. Noz Now, you talk about how some artists get out and do the national circuit.
What was the first step you guys took to becoming more than a just a local
club thing? Bootsy Collins We were recording at King Records, which happened to be over in Cincinnati, Ohio,
which happened to be where James Brown recorded his records. So, that was our
opportunity to get on the big stage. We knew that, so we hung over at King
Records every day after school, waiting and watching for anybody. We happened
to run into a guy called Charles Spurling, who was an
A&R guy. And he
liked us, he had heard about us, he wanted to come and hear us. So we invited him down to a club and
he came down and checked us out. He said, “Man, you cats have got a whole new
energy, you’ve got the rhythm thing you all got. I want ya'll to be my band over
at King Records.” So, that started it, we went over to record some stuff at
King Records with him. Once we did that, all the other producers there –
Henry Glover, who produced Bill Doggett, Hank Ballard, Arthur Prysock, a
whole slew of mugs. He was the first black country & western, soul, gospel,
jazz producer, we had a chance to play on all these records before we got with
James Brown. So, we got to learn discipline by coming in the studio and vibing,
like we did last night. You come in the studio and vibe, because we didn’t know
what was gonna happen. All we know is we’ve got our instruments and if you
allow us to play, we’re gonna tear this mother up! That’s all we knew. So, we
took that attitude wherever we went. We went in there to learn. But at the
same time, give us a chance and we’ll show you. Noz Now, it seems like the word country is coming up a lot in your conversation. What’s the relationship between country and funk? Bootsy Collins King Records housed country, western and bluegrass. All of that was going on
at King while we were recording R&B, soul and funk. So, it was all under
one roof and we got a chance to get a dose of it. Not that country & western
is funk, but Lonnie Mack and Willie Nelson, to me, is the funk of
what they do. I guess it depends on the angle of the dangle and your point of
view. I just considered these cats to be just as funky as anything else. Noz Who were some of the artists you were working with in the King days? Bootsy Collins We actually went on the road with Hank Ballard after recording some records
with him. Marva Whitney, who was James Brown’s female artist and was big
back in the day. Lyn Collins, Vicki Anderson. We got a chance
to go out on the road with these before James said, “These guys are worthy. Let me take them out and funk them up for real.” So he did. Noz Tell us a bit about how that happened, because that’s an interesting story. Bootsy Collins Wow! Well, actually, the time that we were not at King Records, we were
moonlighting, doing our benefit gigs at different clubs. You had the Wine Bar.
You had all of these different rat holes – we called them rat holes because none of
them were bigger than this room, but we loved to jam to these people. And
they were loving it. Sure, they were drunk out of their minds, but at the same
time they were having a good time, everybody was. So, we happened to be in this
club called the Wine Bar, performing a benefit, and we got a call from Bobby Byrd. He said, “Hey, Bootsy man, the
Godfather needs ya’ll to come to…” what is it? Columbus, Georgia, yeah,
Columbus, Georgia, I had to figure out where we were, “Columbus, Georgia, and
he needs you right now.” Now, mind you, we’re playing a gig and we said, “Nah, James don’t want us.” “Yeah, he wants ya’ll right now. I’m coming up on a
plane in James’ Learjet and I’m gonna pick you up in about 45 minutes.” We
thought it was a joke. Actually, he showed up in about 45 minutes and says, “Come on right now, just like you are.” We looked at each other like this is
unreal. But as funk would have it, we said, “Funk it!” We got on the plane,
Afro flew back, straight up, 40,000 feet. First time on a plane, on a jet. That’s how we got broke in. We were virgins, man. Forty thousand feet in the
air, going to be in James Brown’s band, it don’t get no better than that. We
get to the arena and the people are mad. We didn’t know what we were walking
into, all we knew is we’re getting ready to play with James Brown. We didn’t
know at the time that he wanted us to be his band. We thought, since he’d sent us
out on the road he wants us to open up, with Hank Ballard, open up with Marva
Whitney. We had no idea he really wanted us to play behind him. We had got to
be his original band’s friends. We looked up to them. They were our heroes. We
didn’t ever think we were crossing the picket line. But when we walked in we
were actually crossing the picket line, unbeknown to us. We walked in, the
band looking really crazy, like, “Who do these mothers think...?” – and we’re supposed to be
their friends. So, after we get through that mess and the crowd booing because
James is late, the show is late, then the people say it’s our fault. We didn’t
have nothing to do with it. But the people thought we made the show late. So,
there’s a bunch of messes going on before we get back to the Godfather. Once
we get back there, he’s like [imitates James Brown], “Uhh. I knew you could do it.
I want you to go onstage and when I call these songs out I want you to play
what I call out.” “OK.” He knew that we knew all the songs. But we didn’t
actually think we were going get on stage with James Brown. So we get on stage
and he calls them out, “‘Cold Sweat.’” Bam! “‘I Feel Good.’” Bam! So, we knew all the
songs and we made it through the show. I don’t know how we made it, I was a
little fuzzy because I was probably a little geeked and a little lit. It was
unreal. Once we made it through the show it was, “OK, we’re taking off for two
weeks. We’re gonna rehearse, we’re gonna get the show down, you’re gonna be
the band and you’re gonna be called the JB’s.” So, that was the start of it, we
were the JB’s. Noz Shall we play something? Bootsy Collins Yeah, yeah, what about
“Sunny”? That was deep for me.
Check this out, it’s really deep. It wasn’t too far from here. Where was it?
Italy, yeah. I’m 18 years old. (video: James Brown – “Sunny” live performance / applause) Noz So, how old were you then? Bootsy Collins I was 18. Just having the time of my life, man. Traveling all over the world. We
stayed over here for about three weeks that particular outing. Then we went to
Africa and stayed there about three weeks. Just touring everywhere, it was
just crazy. So, crazy in a good way, though. We got a chance to really see different
cultures and styles, people. It was just amazing at that time. Noz Can you tell us a bit about your time in Africa? Bootsy Collins Wow, that was pretty deep. They thought we were like gods. We stepped off the
plane and they were like [bows] and we were, “Oh man, what is this?” I’m
just right off the street, you know, coming into this thing. All of a sudden
it’s... [bows] But James Brown! When you’re with James Brown it’s like, “Whoa!” We
went from nothing to all the way bam, up here. How does a young cat take that? We
took it in a way that when I look back, it was like, “Wow, how did ya’ll get through
those hoops, those distractions? All of the stuff, how did ya’ll get through
that?” It’s really set up for you to fail. The more you get, the more you
want. The more distracted you get, the more distractions seem to show up. We
were so focused on music, I think that was the savior. Music was the savior
for us. We were so dedicated to wanting to play and to see people groove to
what we were playing. Not like, “OK, we copied someone else and we want you to
check our version of it.” No, no, no. We got some original shit right here. That’s
what we took to James Brown, we took our original energy and groove and he
took that and put it in what he was doing. Bam! Here it is. We didn’t know that that’s what was going on. But after years of being away from it, man, this cat
is incredible. He took what we were doing and just put it out there. And Africa,
man, I think it was Fela Ransome then, later Fela Kuti, he invited us to his club. He was known as
the James Brown of Africa, and, man, he invited us to his club. See this space
here, but it’s like maybe eight times bigger. And the roof – there was no roof, it
was sky and stars, so when you look up it’s like you’re outside. All you could
hear on the way to the club is these rhythms and you’ll be talking to whoever
you’re talking to and you’re just grooving for no reason. Then when you
get to the club and you see all these cats on the drums and they had guitars
and basses. All we knew was Tarzan and Jane in Africa, that’s all we knew. So
when we got to Africa and saw all this, it was, “Oh, my god!” We couldn’t
believe it. That’s one thing that changed my life. I can say it probably had a
deep effect on my life. The rhythms that they were doing, even though we
didn’t have tape recorders and stuff like that, we were good at keeping things
in the mind. Our minds were sharp, because we had to use them. We didn’t have computers, the easy way to do it. We had to use what we had humanly
developed. That’s where we’re getting weak at now. But I can’t say weak. When you
have to use something, it’s like a muscle. When you use something it gets
stronger. When you stop using it, it gets weak and you go to something else.
I think as humans are evolving, but at the same time we’re losing the capacity to think on our own,
because we’ve got something to think for us. Which I’m not saying is a bad
thing, but we’re definitely losing the capacity to go in the studio and say,
“OK, like we did last night.” We didn’t know nothing. But we just went in there and there was no pre-nothing, just,
“Nick, what you hear, man?” “Oh, I hear a little something like this here.” “OK, fall
in, get your boy to fall in and let’s see what we got.” I think we’re losing
that and we have to get back to interjecting that because that’s a quality we
got that we don’t want to throw away. I don’t know how I got on the subject, but
that’s the way the funk works. It’s funked up, ya’ll. But it feels so good to be able
to vibe with each other and when we got over there and started vibing with them
cats, we rubbed off on them and they rubbed off on us. So, it was good thing. Noz What did you think of Fela personally? Bootsy Collins Incredible. Just incredible spiritually and musically. His rhythm was
impeccable. Like James, every move he made, we had to watch. We had to make
sure we had a hit for it... [makes series of stab sounds] We had that
down, but we had to study the rhythm of his body. It wasn’t that we were forced
to do that. But if you wanted to be with James Brown, that’s what you did. We
loved doing it, just to see if we could do it. The band before us, that’s what they
were doing, and it was like, “Oh, we could do that.” But saying it is one thing –
you actually have to get in there and do that. Proving things to myself was
the biggest motivator. Proving things to people was nothing to me. I knew I
could be the craziest, the wildest, I knew that from an early age, but really
proving to myself that I could do a certain thing, that I could get in there with
these musicians, that I could get in here with any kind of genre – it ain’t
got to be funk – and make it mine, proving that to myself was the biggest
motivator. Noz James has a reputation of being a harsh bandleader. Is that true? Bootsy Collins Yeah, yeah, that’s true and it was really good. Of course, us young
knuckleheads weren’t really down with it. But at the same time, if you know why
you’re there, to learn, then you put all that stuff aside. It’s like, “This is the
man right here and I wanna learn everything I can learn. Forget all this crap
I’m talking about, that ain’t nothing. I’m here to learn with this guy… what
makes this cat so this and so that? I want to learn that.” So that’s what I did. Noz Did you ever find yourself clashing with him? Bootsy Collins Did I ever! We clashed all the time. But it didn’t matter. I knew where I was
at. I was with greatness and I was nobody. I was just a knucklehead musician
trying to crack a few nuts – and I was cracking quite a few, and it felt pretty
good – and I wanted it to continue growing and getting better, and I knew that
by being with him it could only escalate that. So, I did my best to not clash
so much. Whatever he said I tried to do it. Shine your shoes, keep pressing
your pants. I failed on all that. I failed. I was proud of myself. I was
supposed to comb my hair, if you noticed. You haven’t seen this one, but I
want you to show them this video. My doggone afro was at the side, I was
supposed to comb it so it was really nice looking. And you get up out of bed
and you just go with it, just funk it. When you see this video. Which one is
it? It’s either “Give It Up…” what you got up there? I don’t know if it’s on
that but you can play it. (video: James Brown – “Give It Up Or Turn It Loose” / applause) Oh man, that wasn’t the one with the hair. That was one of my good days right there. Noz You also recorded quite a few classics with James in the studio. What was his
process like there? Bootsy Collins Our biggest one was “Sex Machine.” That was the first to get international
attention. That was done after we did a gig. Most of the sessions were after a
show. James was always into not letting us have wild fun and hanging out with
girls. As you know, you and the fellas, I just don’t know about you
cats, man. You’re young, you want to get out there, drink a little bit, have a
bit of this and that. That’s kind of what we did. But we were known for that
and James wasn’t down with that. He knew if we got distracted we were gonna
miss some of those hits he was doing. And he was probably right. So, what he’d
do was take his time, then take us to the studio, and in the studio we’d
rehearse or record something. With “Sex Machine” we were on our way to the
studio and we were riding a bus, from the gig, and he said [James Brown
voice], “Bobby, gimme something to write with.” He got a brown paper bag,
tore the paper bag in half and he started writing. “I feel like a sex machine.
Bootsy, Catfish, come on up here.” [coughs] Man, when I talk like him, it’s…
man! He said, “Come on up here.” We went up in the bus, sat right behind him
and Bobby Byrd, and he wrote the lyrics. He said, “This is what I mean.
[sings] Get on up, get on up…” That was our thing, so we had to read his
body language. So, it was like being in Japan and you don’t know the language.
You have to interpret what he’s doing, what he’s feeling, what he’s saying.
We were like, “Oh, like this?” “Yeah, yeah, yeah, that’s it, that’s it. I’m glad I thought of it. That’s it, son,” [laughter], and then I’d fall in with the bass thing. “Yeah, Bootsy, Bootsy, Bootsy, you’re killing me, you’re killing me!” So, we started right there, and we’d take that to the
studio. Once we got to the studio, we had a good vibe of where we were going.
That’s pretty much the way we would start it up. Some of the times we would go
to the studio and we might be rehearsing on something, and James might hear something
and go, “Uhh, right there, right there. Just do that.” And then that would
become a song. That’s kind of how we record now. Of course, we’ve got all the
goodies to help us. But then it was right off the top, and you had to do it
until you got it right. It wasn’t like you could walk in the studio and bam,
there it is. You might come up with the thang, but you have to make it
perfect. As perfect as it could be. We all wanted it that way, too, so that
was another good point. Noz Should we play “Sex Machine”? Bootsy Collins Oh, oh yeah. Yeah, cool. Feel like a sex machine. (music: James Brown – “Sex Machine”) Noz So, you talk about searching for perfection in the studio. I think that might
be one of a handful of perfect funk songs. Bootsy Collins What’s really deep is, when you’re actually doing it, we didn’t have no idea
that we were creating something that was gonna be lasting, something people
were gonna fall into and it was gonna groove people like that. I think the
part of not knowing helps the experience of getting there. Wow, that sounds
pretty deep. What did I say? [Inaudible from audience] Oh, man! Wait, I said
something pretty cool. The process of not knowing and the experience of
getting there. Wow, that’s some bad stuff! [Applause] I wish I had that in a capsule. But that to me is what really makes good
passionate music. Not only music. Good passionate anything, whatever you’re
doing. If you apply that and just go with the experimental approach, I think
that’s just like experimenting with a chick. Or the chick experimenting with
you. That to me brings about the best combustibles, right? [Points at audience member] That’s a new word, Nick. Don’t steal my word, man. It brings
about some extra organic stuff that makes you explode. I think that’s what
happened with “Sex Machine.” It was just some organic stuff that bumped into each
other and said, “Wow, I like you.” “Yeah, I like you too.” “Well, let’s funk
some stuff up.” And that’s what happened. Noz Were there a lot of opportunities for that kind of organic experimentation
under James? Bootsy Collins Yeah, that’s all we did. We didn’t have anything written out. I’d tell you a
funny story but I don’t wanna take up too much time. Noz Go ahead. Bootsy Collins Well, OK, you talked me into it. We were in the studio and this was the first
time we got to play with a big band. You’ve got all these million horns, all
these strings. We were just used to playing with the band, the regular band.
Then he brought in this arranger, a guy named Dave Matthews, who’s actually still in New York. He came in, a really weird-
looking dude, like a hippie dude who was the conductor of the orchestra. We
were like, “Whoa! We wanna be with this guy.” He had the long hair, the beard. He was just wow-looking. And it was perfect for us. He brought us in there and
he said, “OK, this is what I want ya’ll to do.” He set music in front of all of
us, the horns, the strings. Me and Catfish are sitting next to each other and
we kind of snickered a little bit, because we didn’t know how to read and he’s putting
this music in front of us. “Doesn’t he know we don’t know how to read?” I
guess he couldn’t care less whether we could or not, he just figured that since we
were there we could do it. And we led him on to believe that we could do it.
It was like a challenge for us. I looked at Cat, Cat looked at me and we said,
“Let’s do what we do.” Without even saying anything to each other, we were
like, “Let it rip!” He was standing up there with his thing, he counted it
off and everybody hit but us. Right? We knew that if we heard it a couple of times we
were gonna have it down. But nobody knew that but us. So, they ran through it,
he came over and, “Y’all got a problem?” “No, no, we just wanted to hear what
it sounded like first before we jumped in. Can we hear it one more time?” He counts it off, play it again. So we say, “OK, we’ve got it. Roll the tape,
we’re cool, we got it.” “But I ain’t heard it.” “Roll the tape, we got it.” He counted it off. [counts] It was the “Sunny” thing – that was the live
version – but actually we recorded that in the studio. That was one of the
songs. We also did “‘Georgia [on My Mind’” [sings]..., we did that
with a big band and we’d never done that before. So Dave Matthews, he loved it
so much, he didn’t stop it. I knew that he knew we weren’t playing what was on
there, because we had some extra-curriculars going on. I could tell he was
going, “Yeah, yeah, I didn’t write that shit on there but yeah, I like it.” So, he
was a really cool cat and after everything was over he came over to me and
Cat, pulled us to the side and said, “Man, what an incredible job you did. I
wished I could’ve wrote what ya’ll played. But I had no idea you didn’t know
how to read. But thank God it all worked out.” Me and Cat looked at each other, because we didn’t know what was gonna happen. We didn’t know if we were gonna
get fired right on the spot in front of everybody. All we knew was, “We’re
gonna make it through this. We don’t know how, but we’re gonna make it through
this. I do this, you do that, let’s hit it. There’s the music, we don’t know what we’re
looking at, but we can feel the vibe.” And we went with it. Thank god we made
it through. Dave, to this day, laughs about it, because no one else knew. The
rest of the band had no idea. They thought Dave wrote that stuff and they came
up to him, “You’re so incredible.” But it was a good thing. Then Dave came
back and said, “If you ever need me to help you with reading any of these
things…” We said yeah, because we were doing a lot of studio stuff then. We
said, “If you could help us with the chords. When you do the music, write it in chords. Not the notes, because we have no idea, but if you give us the
chords, the changes, we’ll wear it out.” So that’s what he started doing for
us instead of putting the notes up there for us to play. Every session we did with him, that’s the way we did it. It became a thing! But that’s not gonna
work for everybody. That was just a thing. We made it through and I’m thankful. Noz You mentioned Dave Matthews coming from more of a hippie background. This was
a really interesting time in America and in music. James obviously had more of a strait-laced
vibe, but when did the whole influence of psychedelia and hippie culture start
creeping in to your music? Bootsy Collins That’s a good question. When you say it, we were having bashes or clashes, that was mainly because of that. Bands were coming on the scene. Bands wanted
to be in the forefront. Bands wanted to sing and play and get all the girls
instead of the singers getting them all. It was a perfect time. The bands were
coming up, and we were in that moment and we wanted to come up, being a band
instead of playing behind singers. Singers were great, that’s how we got where
we got. But at the same time, that movement what you’re talking about was
beginning right there. And we just happened to fall into that. So, after we
played with James we wanted to go out and be a band, just play and be wild,
dress the way we wanted to dress. So, James was feeling that and he knew we
were drawing away. So when we split we were looking for something to get with
that was kind of like what we wanted to do. And that was get freaky on stage,
get freaky with the music, just get freaky with it. That’s what time that was.
That was the best time too, man. I could tell you stories. But… Noz Go ahead, that’s what you’re here to do. Bootsy Collins No, no, no… there’s too many stories and it might make me wanna do it again.
But those were some great times and I just hope I can bring some of that to
the table now to help balance some of this stuff. These cats like Nick, and is
Oliver here? There Oliver is, that cat on the keyboards. Stand up Oliver! [Applause] That cat there, man, he reminds me of Bernie Worrell and the way we’d record stuff. I don’t know how I’ve jumped from James to
George already,
but that’s cool. I would go in the studio and maybe lay up, lay a track down
like we do: The rhythm, the bass, Cat with guitar, and then a lot of time we
had a drummer, or just a metronome thing. We would play a groove, just to get
the idea down. Then when Bernie got up, he came on over, like Oliver did, and
he didn’t even listen to the groove, he just sat down and started hitting it.
That’s the way we did it. A lot of stuff would start off as a riff, like we
did last night, and then things would just come. That was the whole concept
and people just fit into that and just had a good time with it. It just inspired everybody. Noz I think we might be getting a little ahead of ourselves. So after you split from James, how did you fall in with George Clinton and Parliament-Funkadelic? Bootsy Collins How did I fall in? [Pause] What happened was, after we left James Brown we
were in Cincinnati, we reformed our old group. Philippé Wynne, who was actually from
Cincinnati, he was our singer and we did the band stuff. We got a call from
the Spinners
from Detroit. They wanted us to be their back-up band and for Philippé to be
their lead singer. We said, “OK, cool, nothing else happening.” Our James
Brown money has run out. All we were doing was promoting ourselves, buying
posters. We had trunks full of records. Nobody was buying our records but us
and we couldn’t even give our mugs away. We’d buy all these records and pretty
much kept them and gave them away at gigs. We went to Detroit with the intention of playing
with the Spinners, but once we got there we ran into this girl in a club named
Mallia Franklin and she said,
“Man, you need to meet up with George Clinton and Funkadelic.” We were, “We’ve
been trying to catch Funkadelic. We wanna take it to the stage with them
mothers.” We wanted to battle them. We were into that take-it-to-the-stage,
battling-on-the-stage thing, because we knew we were bad. We felt we were the
tightest and we felt like we would massacre anybody. Bang, “We’re the baddest!”
It got to the point where we started flaunting that, so we were, “Yeah, we’ll
meet George, definitely.” So, she took me over to George’s house, and I walked
in. First of all, imagine this, ladies and gentlemen: You walk into George
Clinton’s house, no lights are on, nothing but a black light, no furniture,
all you see is blackness and then over in the corner you see a sheet. A
glowing white sheet just sitting in the corner. I said, “Well, that must be
George.” I walk over. “How you doing, man? You know, Bootsy.” “Man, I know, I’ve been looking for you.” So, we started up a conversation and he was like, “Man, I would love it if you would come out and become Funkadelic, help me do this thing
on the road. I’m recording records, Parliament, Funkadelic.” I said, “Well, the only thing is I’ve got this band. Philippé is with me and he would have to come as a singer.” He said, “I don’t need other singers, I just need the band.” I said, “Oh wow, that’s kind of deep.” That was something I had to
think about. “What do we need to do?” “Change your name to Funkadelic.” “No, we can’t change our name.” Our name was House Guests, and we wanted to stay with that. So he said, “OK, I just need you to go on the road so let’s hook that up.” So we hooked that up, went back and told Philippé, “Why don’t you go
with the Spinners, because they need a lead singer? You go with the Spinners,
we’re gonna go with Funkadelic.” It was perfect, perfect, couldn’t have worked
out no better. So, we went out with Funkadelic, we got out there and I think for the first couple of weeks it was Parliament-Funkadelic featuring the
House Guests band, for the first
couple of weeks. We stayed out there, you know, taking LSD, the purple haze, the
sunshine, the mescaline, you name it. All of that, and the next thing you know
everybody was calling us Funkadelic. And it got so twisted that we started thinking, “Yeah, we are Funkadelic.” So the next thing we know, House Guests
got eliminated off the posters and we became Funkadelic, and we was
cool with it. [Laughs] So that’s how it started. Noz How did a Parliament tour differ from a James Brown tour? Bootsy Collins Oh, it was totally insane. George’s whole thing was, “Whatever you’ve got, I want some of it. And whatever you’ve got, you ain’t got as much as I have.” So,
you were always in that mode of showing George how much you’ve got. “Oh, I can
do this. Check this.” So, it was always you proving that you’ve got more and
than him allowing you to do that. How many people would do that, allow you to
do this craziness? The world was run back then, too, by money and hits. If you
didn’t have a hit record, if you come in here playing some cool, creative
experimental stuff [sweeps hand]… It wasn’t like you were outta
here, because it was a time of creating new stuff. But record companies still
wanted hit records. When George and I would go to the radio stations, they’d
say, “We want you to do interviews and stuff, but you can’t use the word “funk” and we can’t play your hit record because it’s got all those airplanes
in it.” We were, “Airplanes? What is that?” They were talking about the
strange sounds and all the... [makes whirling noise] They were used to having
the ties on and stuff. Especially for black music. Black music was totally
different. The caucasian thing was more open, they were used to the rock
scene, but blacks were like, “Oh no, he didn’t!” “Yes, I did!” So, they had
to get used to it. Jimi, the blacks were like, “Oh no.” That was a little bit too
freaky. “We can’t deal with that.” We didn’t know who we were at that
particular time, you can’t get freaky like that. [To Nick] We don’t eat
mouth, Nick. You know what mouth is? Huh? Nick, I know you know what mouth is? [Laughter] Got anything you wanna tell me? Tell me what mouth is. Hold on, ladies and
gentlemen. We had a code. Nick, Nick, you gotta live by the code now. So we
had a code, we’d go round saying, “Man, I need some mouth tonight.” You know what I’m talking about? Noz Wanna fill in the rest of us? Bootsy Collins Well, it might seep in there. Let’s see how it goes. What it was, for a brother to
eat mouth – y’all with me? – it was unheard of. Of course, now you had the
younger brothers who were coming up who were, “Man, we can do anything, we
don’t give a funk.” So, the new brothers, which I was part of, happily, we had
fun with it, but at the same time our people were having very difficult
problems with that. For us, wearing wild colors, we loved it, but the people
weren’t into that. Most of that crazy stuff that Jimi was doing, the blacks
weren’t into that. But the way we did it, we made it kind of cool. They
started getting it. “OK, it might be alright to eat a little mouth. Let me try
that.” One or two might eat a little mouth, they tell their friends. Next
thing you know, ten people eating mouth, then you’ve got a whole city eating
mouth. It was a good thing, Nick, it was great. You eat mouth, don’t you? [inaudible reply / laughs] So, it wasn’t only the music, it was eating mouth that went with that. But I’ll move on. You want me to move on? But that was the kind of
thing that helped make funk a good word. Funk was a bad word when we were
first starting, like, “You can’t say that on the radio.” They wouldn’t even let us
do interviews because our interviews were 90% with the word funk. Oh, no. Then the
demand started to happen. The more we played live and the more people were seeing what
we were doing, they got familiar with it. The next thing you know they’re
requesting our records to be played. The more visible, the more we got out
there, the more people understood. “Ah!” Because man’s first thing is, if they
don’t understand something they shoot it down. So we got shot down. The good
thing about us was when we got shot down, it made us want to get back up. We
wanted to prove then, “Oh no, we know we got the funk and we’re gonna funk you up.”
That was just in the back of our mind. Like, when Muhammad Ali would say, “I am the greatest
of all time.” That’s what we felt with the funk. It was like we’re the funkiest mothers in
the universe and we don’t give a funk what you say. And then we’d funk ’em
up. So Muhammad Ali would say he’s the greatest; if he said that and then
couldn’t back it up, he’d be out the window. But we felt we were the funkiest mothers in the universe and we wanted to prove it. Noz Well, you must have had a pretty liberal record label that would let you go
out on that limb. Bootsy Collins You know what? One of them, I can say one of them was very broadminded and he
had signed Kiss and he had
signed Parliament, Neil Bogart at Casablanca Records. The rest of them, they didn’t get it then
and they never will get it. They only signed us because we were making money.
We knew that, we didn’t have a problem with that, we just want to funk. And an
outlet. We were gonna get an outlet. We didn’t know who or where. We were
gonna get an outlet. George, I must say, was probably the most genius mother
on the planet about the music and how it worked in the business in that
circle. This cat orchestrated some mess that can’t be duplicated. We were all
signed to major record labels. These were the same cats that were saying, “Uh
oh, not you mothers. I want you, I want you, I want…” Uh oh, not Nick, no
[laughs]. So, we got that treatment all our career, we were used to that.
Somebody’s gonna open the door, and once they opened the door, we gangbanged
that mother. It was a pleasure, it was a joy. Once they let us in, it was like they can’t
get us out of here now. And they knew it. The only thing that was gonna take us
out was us taking the drugs and overdoing the girl thing. Sure enough, that’s
what happens to pretty much all of us. We take ourselves out. The greatest
musicians, the greatest artists wind up taking their own selves out. I’ve been given
tons and tons of different chances, but this chance, I don’t wanna take it for
granted. Some things you have to give up, and my beautiful wife sitting right
here. Patti, stand up baby! [Patti stands up / applause] There she is. She
helped me get off drugs. Of course, we were heavily indulging in them at
first. Then she got too deep, right? She got too deep with it. I said, “Is
that the way I’m looking?” I figured, “OK, I probably look like that. Now I’ve
gotta help her.” We helped each other, and in doing so, in the end I think I got the best part of
the deal as far as cleaning my life up, and realizing I get another chance. I
got a chance to get out here with Nick, Oliver, you guys, Red Bull, I got another chance
to come out here and share some of this stuff so you won’t make the same
mistake, man. I can’t call it a mistake, because I would do everything the same way I
did when I was doing it, because that experience was just so beautiful. I wouldn’t want to
change that, but many of us don’t get a second chance to do this again. I got a second chance. If I can help it, I’m gonna be around for a while with ya’lls help. So ya’ll continue
to hold us up, because it’s very important that we stay around and share, man,
just have fun together, funk together, eat mouth together. Right, Nick? [laughs] Noz What do you think it is that gives artists that self-destructive nature? Bootsy Collins I’m gonna tell you exactly what gives artists that nature. It’s the BS that
artists and musicians have to deal with, and all they wanna do is create. All
the artists and musicians wanna do is be creative and have a good time doing it. The BS is
when you have to figure out the business end of it. It’s a curse and a
blessing. The blessing is being creative, having a great time. “Oh, we really
slammed it, we’re having a great time.” And then the mug shows up and says,
“OK, you owe me for this and such and such.” It’s like, “Oh man, I ain’t got the money.”
“What do you mean you ain’t got the money?” That whole part of it helps
destroy the creative force that’s in there after a period of time. Some people, it doesn’t take as long, some people it takes a long time to knock that down. But between that and getting the fun out, I call it getting the dog out of me. Nick, you understand what I’m saying? I love Nick. He’s so down, he’s with me,
he understands my lingo. Yeah, I’ve got the translator over there for you. But
the dog in you, especially the guys, we’ve got to recognize that we do have that
dog in us. The only thing you can do is release that mother. You’ve got to
take him off the leash. The sad thing is when the female figures, “I can put
him on a leash, no problem.” That’s when you get like a James Brown and me
kind of clash, when you think you can harness or control somebody. Throw that away. It ain’t about controlling. You can’t control this creative
force; nobody can. With all the examples we get, haven’t we learned anything
yet? It ain’t about controlling nobody. It’s about having fun with each other,
sharing with each other, and not dictating. “I own you.” “No, you don’t own me!”
That’s the crap we’ve been put on. It’s not just musicians and artists, it’s
the world. But I think musicians and artists can help change that. That’s what I’m
looking forward to, is first for us to get that out of our minds. When you’re in
a studio, it ain’t about dominating, unless you’re called on. When you’re
called on to dominate, like we did last night. It’s like, “OK, who’s gonna step up?”
Everybody started looking around, then Nick said, “OK, I’ve got this.” He
stepped up. Then the drummer stepped up. Not saying this is wrong, OK? Because certain times you have a thing and you want it to go a certain way. Nothing is
wrong with that. But as long as you develop the attitude of service, the attitude of, “What can I do for you today?” I walk in the
studio and it’s, “What do you want me to do?” “Oh man, we want you to just be
you.” “Well, that don’t tell me nothing. What do you really want me to do?”
That to me is where we can grow and be the leaders of tomorrow. Not controllers of them all, but leaders. And that’s what we need out here now and that’s why you’re all here. It might be under the disguise of music, but at the same time as people, we need to all grow. We’ve got to continue to do that. I don’t know where all that rap came from, but there it is. Noz So, getting back to your story, obviously you were given a lot of room to grow under George. I
think you emerged as a songwriter and a creative force in general. Bootsy Collins It was because of that I got that freedom. Same thing with Red Bull. When
somebody thinks enough about you to say, “Come on in. What you got? Go ahead
and do it.” To me, there’s not enough of that and Red Bull are opening the
door to that. For me, it’s a beautiful thing to walk in here and see the people doing
their thing. I got a chance yesterday to go to the different rooms. You call
them bedroom studios – man, that is such a beautiful thing. These are the things I
dream about doing actually being done. That’s amazing, it’s inspiring for me,
it gives me hope. When you’re out there in the world listening to the same
stuff, you just kind of lose hope. But when you see young people doing stuff
together, that’s a whole other animal. It’s set for you to play with yourself.
Nick, I’m pretty tired of playing with myself. Are you? Yeah, we can play
together [laughter]. OK! But that’s what I saw here, people playing together, and today is
extraordinary. Noz Shall we play something from the Funkadelic days? Bootsy Collins Yeah, what you got? How about “Give Up the Funk”? Then I’ll probably hit that
a little bit [picks up bass]. (music: Parliament – “Give Up The Funk (Tear The Roof Off The Sucker) / Bootsy plays along / applause) Bootsy Collins That particular song that we did, we went into the studio as a band and just
hit it. I came up with the [sings bassline]. Bernie stepped in and came up
with the keyboard stuff. The horns, Fred Wesley came in and did his thing on
top of that. And we all just did it at the same time. Those kind of sessions were just
incredible. What you finally heard was the best take of that song we did. But
the other stuff, the jamming stuff we were doing that had nothing to do with
this song, was probably some of the best stuff we’ve ever done. And nobody got to hear it. That’s the sad part about the record companies owning that stuff. Noz It’s on tape? Bootsy Collins Yeah, it’s out there somewhere. But that’s another issue, another issue. All of that stuff was just getting in the studio and vibing. I’d like to call
[points at participant] my boy,
Jivraj. Come on up, Jivraj. [Participant comes up / applause] What’s up, bubba? This is a funky boy. I
guess you already know. He’s a funky mug, man. Nick introduced me to him
yesterday and I was like, “Yeah, he’s on the one, he’s on the one.” So, what I wanna do is give a
demonstration of how we start a groove in the studio and then just go from
there. Play “Funkentelechy,”
play a bit of it then we’re gonna show you how we started it off in the
studio What I want to do is demonstrate a little of how that would work in a studio.
Actually, I play drums on that too. Most people don’t know that I do a little
drum thing too. I played drums on that, but let me tell you how I did it. We
had a click track and if no one was available, which happened a lot because we
stayed up all hours of the night, so whoever made it to the studio first was
the one who had control of that day. I’d make sure I got there about 9 AM the
next day. Doesn’t matter if I’d partied till about 6, 7 AM, I’d be in the studio
around 9 AM ready to hit it. I knew if I wasn’t, you’ve got 25 other mugs ready to
get in the studio. So, what I’d do is play a line. Guitar player Catfish would
do the line that I’m doing on this particular kind of song and we would play to a
click track. Once I get the click track down, then I put the drums on. So
that’s how I did that. Bernie would come and do his keyboard thing. So, we’re
gonna demonstrate how this song came to, how do you say it? Fruitation. Is that a word? Noz Fruition. Bootsy Collins God, what is fruitation, man? I’m still funked up. Alright, check it out. [Bootsy plays bass / drums and keyboards come in] That’s basically how we would put a groove together. [Applause] Stand up fellows, give it up. On the one, on the one. That’s how we did that thang. Oliver, why don’t you and Nick come on back up? Since you’re already
here, why don’t we demonstrate that vibe we did last night. [Two participants
come up] Give ’em a nice round, y’all! [applause] We’re gonna demonstrate how we did this last night, kind of get a feel for it.
Wait a minute, you were playing last night too. We don’t have two keyboards?
It was great what you were playing, though. We don’t have another keyboard?
Why don’t you come up with us? Give her a nice round now. [participant comes
up / applause] Hands off, Oliver, that’s Nick’s girl. Oh, I’m sorry
[laughs]… Oh, not the mouth, something tells me I shouldn’t have told Nick
about the mouth. Nick is back now, he’s back. This is how we kicked it off.
Now Nick, what’s the name of this song? Participant It’s called “Ode to Bootsy.” Bootsy Collins Wait a minute, we keep changing the title, man. Participant It’s called “ADD.” Bootsy Collins I Am! Audience member “I Am ADD.” Bootsy Collins Here we go. Are you all ready? You think you heard something already. Wait
till I tell you what the band name is. [Shouts] Are you ready for the band
name? Audience member We’re called Fuck Shit Up. Bootsy Collins Here we go, we’re gonna count it off. (music: Fuck Shit Up – “I Am ADD” / applause) Now you see what we can do
when we’ve got a joint together, it’s just such a great vibe. So we’re not
gonna hold them too much longer, right? Noz: Shall we take some questions? Bootsy Collins I want them to see one thing. A tribute to Jimi Hendrix, who actually I got a
lot of influence from. Noz Why don’t you tell us how Jimi influenced you? Bootsy Collins Jimi was the only one, besides my brother Catfish, who I had in my room with
the black light on. I had a Jimi Hendrix picture over my bed. I’d come in and
smoke weed with my black light on and look at my Jimi Hendrix picture for days
and listen to his music. Not only did he do so many things musically, but he
crossed so many boundaries, like we were talking about before. For me, as a
young black man, Jimi Hendrix was like God. He was doing all of what I saw
myself as able to do because of him. I was looking at him and thinking, “Wow, if he did that then I can do it.” It was an inspiration for me. My brother was
eight years older than me, so Jimi was like nine or ten years older than I was. So, for me it was, “Wow, this is incredible.” I said to myself when I got the
chance to do a record the way I wanted to do it, I’d do a tribute to Jimi
Hendrix and to James Brown. This tribute here is to Jimi Hendrix. The quality
isn’t too great with the video, but check it out, the song is off the new
album. It’s called “Mirrors Tell Lies.” (music: Bootsy Collins – “Mirrors Tell Lies” / applause) The master, yeah, yeah. What happened to help this come to, what is it, fruitation? Noz Fruition. Bootsy Collins Fruition. Why can’t I get that word right? Funked up, man. We did some stuff with the family, Janie
Hendrix and them. The box set that they did – what is it called, Seattle Boy? –
I actually got a chance to do the voice of Hendrix. So reading his personal
stuff, actually doing the voice for that, totally blew my mind. Just wiped me
out completely. So I got the opportunity to do that. Whoever knew, a long-haired
sucker from out on the street, had Jimi Hendrix up on the wall, that I would
be chosen to do a voice for him? So this is perfect timing. I’ve
gotta do a tribute. So I asked the family, could I use something that he said? They said sure. So they sent me a few things and I picked out what I thought
would be great for this record and it’s actually Jimi’s voice that you hear.
Man, it touched me in a way that I guess no mouth have touched me. No offense, but
it’s a whole different level, you know? But we’ll keep moving. Noz One of the interesting things about bringing everyone all together here, you get to
see stars become fans. Stars who are still fans. Bootsy Collins Yeah, everybody has come up off of somebody, is a fan of somebody. With this album
I wanted to make sure that young people especially knew that, OK, they might
be fans of us now, but we were fans of somebody else. And whom you just saw
was a fan of somebody else. So, what you do in that case is you go back and connect the dots
so you can be educated, because if you just go with what’s happening today like
everyone’s been programmed to do, then you don’t really know the history. Not
only do you want to be a great musician, you wanna know the history of where
your music came from and all of that. So, you’ll be that much ahead of the next drummer, the next bass player, the next guitar player. You’ll
have something more to offer. It’s not just, “I’m an artist.” Take your
artistry as many places as you can, especially on an educational tip. That’s
what we did also on the James Brown tribute. If we can leave out on that one,
we’ll be good to go. This is on the same album as well, a tribute to James
Brown who brought me into the business. (music: Bootsy Collins feat. Rev Al Sharpton – “JB: Still The Man”) James Brown, y’all. [applause] Noz So do you think we’ve got a few minutes for some questions? Bootsy Collins Yeah, if you want. Noz Can we get some mics? Audience member I remember in that video that we opened with that Snoop Dogg said if there was no Bootsy
Collins, there’d be no Snoop Dogg, which is something I totally agree with. So I was curious whether you have a favorite G-funk record. Bootsy Collins Probably would be “Gin & Juice.” Probably would be that one. Audience member Good choice. Bootsy Collins [Laughs] Thank you, thank you. Audience member Did you play bass on Deee-Lite’s “Groove Is in the Heart” or did you just do vocals on that? Bootsy Collins Yeah, bass and vocals. Audience member How did you…? Bootsy Collins It was originally a sample. Audience member Have you had any other experiences with house music or dance music? Bootsy Collins Oh yeah, Fatboy Slim. We did
“Weapons Of Choice” and ”Illuminati.” I did a few things
with Fatboy. That would probably be the biggest house-type thing that I’ve
done. But I’ve recorded a lot of that kind of stuff, definitely. Deee-Lite was
one of the best experiences I’ve had. We came to Madrid and played here with Deee-Lite, and it pretty was awesome, really good time. [pause] Oh, thank god it wasn’t Nick with a question. Oh, it’s coming, it’s coming. Oh, my goodness. [Laughs] I better run and hide. Help me. Not Nick. Audience member What’s going on? You talked a lot about of stuff like performing and recording and that process, but we didn’t really get into the rehearsing process, the work ethic. I did my
research on you and the JB’s, Parliament and Funkadelic and James Brown and
everything. I always hear stories about the brutal rehearsals and I want you
to get into that a little bit. Bootsy Collins That’s good, that’s good. We took rehearsals probably even more serious than
we took the shows. At rehearsals we just kept at it. I remember last night we
were playing this thing you heard. We played it a few times, and somebody
said, “Oh, one of my fingers is hurting.” And that was unheard of. I remember
fingers bleeding. We practiced until people’s hands bled. And we weren’t doing
it on purpose to make people’s hands bleed, we were just trying to get it
right. A keyboard player told me a couple of years ago – and I never
recognized this, I guess when you’re so focused you don’t look at the physical
part of it, you’re just, “OK, we’ve gotta get this done.” That’s all I was looking at. He brought it to my attention. He pulled me aside –
we were rehearsing again to get ready for this tour we did a few months ago
and we rehearsed for two weeks, every day. To me this was nothing. He called
me to the side and said, “Man, do you remember the rehearsals that we used to do?”
I said, “Yeah, I remember.” And he said, “Do you remember our hands bleeding?” I never even
thought about that, because it was nothing. We just had to get it done. Musicians’
hands were bleeding on the keyboards. You’d have blood on the piano, blood on
the guitar. But this was just a part of it; we wanted to get it right. And it
wasn’t just me. This is a good point. I’m glad you brought this up. The way I
got it instilled in me is that you, each one of you, are responsible for your
note, like it or not. When we were with James Brown, if somebody dropped out
you could tell. It’s like driving a car with eight cylinders and two of them
drop out. You’re gonna notice that immediately. It wasn’t about dropping out, having a
smoke, taking a drink. The way I came up was, like, we had to be on it. The break was when we had a chance
to go offstage for 10 minutes. Then if we had to go back, bam, we were on. But
there was no break on stage. Oh, no, it was like [clicks fingers] all night long. It was
unheard of, “I’m tired, I’ve gotta go and do this.” I ain’t gotta go do
nothing! This is what I do. I listen to all of this stuff now and I don’t come
down on it because I understand people don’t come up that way. I happened to
come up when you had to work that hard at it. We didn’t have anything to take
the pressure off. You had to use your memory. You had to go in the studio and
remember your part. “Remember when I told you that riff over at so-and-so’s two nights ago?” “Oh yeah, man, I got that.” “Play it!” [mimes guitar] “Oh yeah, he’s got it.” There were no tape recorders. Then when we hit the studio
it’s, “OK, everybody hit this riff.” Everybody on it. And if we ain’t on it
then we rehearse and we rehearse until we get it. And that’s just the way it
was. So when they try to squeeze me into a box about what’s better, today or
then, it’s not really about that. It’s all different times when we come
up. I’m just used to a certain level of punishment. But it’s the kind of
punishment I knew would help me grow. When you look at it as punishment for
punishment’s sake, that will make you back off. I embraced it. Another thought to leave you with, when I say embrace it, that means the good stuff. The good rap, when people tell me about what James did to me, why I didn’t get paid for “Sex Machine” when I came up with the bassline – “you should be getting this and you should be
getting that” – the way I looked at it is I should be paying him for being in
the presence of his greatness. To tell somebody that today, they don’t
understand that. So, I don’t waste time saying that because it’s useless for
someone who hasn’t come up in that time. So, the punishment that he gave out,
when people say, “Was he strict, was he demanding?” – of course he was strict
and demanding. And he better have been, because we would have run over him. We
were young, crazy kids from out of the street. You better have some balls about
yourself because we’re gonna come in and dominate. And he knew, but his whole
thing was, “It’s gotta be like this.” But he left room for us in the music arena because he knew we had the fresh street thing. He wasn’t stupid; that’s why he got to where he got. Just know that even the boss person, or the one who gets on your last freaking nerve, that could be the very mug that helps push you to be the greatest that you could ever possibly be. Keep that in
mind. Embrace that, as opposed to, “Man, I’m so sick and tired of that mug.” I wasn’t sick and tired of James Brown, because I knew I was getting something. I might not have been able to call it out, but I knew, with the rehearsals and all that. And today,
it’s in me. That’s what I do. I don’t even think about it. I can go on forever
with that. We were recording last night and they were, “You want to sit down?”
“Nah, let’s roll, let’s roll.” Once that’s inbred in you, it stays with you.
And that’s what I want all ya’ll to try to embrace because when you’re not used to
doing it the hard way, you’ll always take the easy way out. But if you build
your muscle and continue to build it, you’ll get stronger and stronger and
stronger, wiser and wiser. And that’s what you want to be – you don’t want to
be a stupid musician just out here playing music. Of course, that would be great.
I was a stupid musician out there just playing music and having a good time; it was great. But I
looked at a lot of my friends and they’re not here no more. What can I do?
I’ve gotta get smart, I’ve gotta do something. If this is your living then
you got to get it together, man. It’s practicing, it’s studying, it’s all the things you
don’t really… all of that. I hate to bore you with that kind of rap. But that’s
the real deal and not the deal dough. Audience member Thank you [applause]. Bootsy Collins Thanks for that, that was good, man. Oh no, not Nick. Audience member When I first started collecting vinyl, 10, 12 years ago, Funkadelic records were always… because
when you’re crate-digging and you go through all those crates and some records
might look the same. But Funkadelic’s all boom, crazy colors, spaceships,
aliens. “What is this?” I didn’t even know at the time, but your records became
what I sought out. So, I kept getting copies in better and better condition, because most of the time they were super worn-out. One of the prizes is I got this
really nice copy of Maggot Brain. The cover just bugs your
eyes out, you know? But the record itself I thought was really groundbreaking and
amazing, it’s still one of my favorite albums. Bootsy Collins Eddie Hazel, man. Underrated like a mug, but I
know what you’re saying. Audience member I was wondering if you had any thoughts about that era of Funkadelic. Bootsy Collins Eddie Hazel, he was that cat. He brought the rock element to Funkadelic that
broke all the boundaries with just being a black group. I think the mixture
made Funkadelic what it was at a time when I guess you would have to say it wasn’t globally accepted, a
black man playing rock music. So, it was always a struggle when you’re first
doing some stuff like that. It’s always a struggle to get through. “Ah, they
shouldn’t be doing that. Put some ties on.” People are not open enough to accept you. It’s the same thing we were talking about with the Jimi thing, especially black people weren’t ready to accept that. Audience member I have so many Funkadelic albums, I get mixed up which tracks are on which, but I think
Maggot Brain has “Who Says A Funk Band Can’t Play Rock Music?” Is that Maggot Brain? Bootsy Collins No, that wasn’t Maggot Brain but I know the song you’re talking about. Audience member Because the first time I heard that song I thought it was, damn, on it. Bootsy Collins That all comes from embracing the people saying, “No, you can’t do that,” and
then saying, “Well, funk you, check this out.” That’s the privilege we’ve got,
to really express what we feel. We’ve got a privilege that a lot of people just don’t
have. It’s up to you to use that privilege and not abuse it, so it’s a very
thin line between misuse and use. I want you to use me but nobody wants to be
misused. When you put yourself in that perspective, when you see yourself
misusing somebody, think to yourself, “Would I wanna be misused?” Nobody wants
to be misused. I wanna be used. Use me, James, use me. George, use me. I love
being used. But when it comes down to misusing, we as people, we don’t wanna
be misused. So, let’s bring it to the table, even if you can’t explain it. Be
about using. I’m good with that. Misuse, there’s nothing wrong with that
because it brings about telling them, [points at audience member] like, you know,
that song, it brings about those things. So in reality, it really is all good, because in the end it works for you if you embrace it. The ones that don’t
embrace it, they have a struggle. That’s our gig, to help ease that burden,
kind of break it down lightly. I don’t know why I’m getting so deep. You
shouldn’t ask these deep questions, man. Don’t you know I’m deep? I’m a deep fella, man. Oh no, not Nick. Oh, it’s serious? OK. Audience member The dynamic between you and Bernie Worrell. Before you guys, no one had ever
done the low-end with the acoustic bass and the synth and it’s still being bit to
this day. I met Bernie a few times and just share with the room… that man… Bootsy Collins For me, I ran into a guy that was so brilliant, knew how to play what he
played frontwards and backwards. I came from a school where all I knew is what
I felt. So, when we got together, the wrong stuff that I would play, sometimes he
would try to correct me until he found out that, “Oh, that shit works.” He would
embellish the wrong that I’m playing, and it sounded right. And with his
stuff, all the right stuff that he would do, I’d come in and funk it up. Those two together, we
embraced each other – it’s the thing I was talking about – we embraced each
other, even though we were from different schools. Musically, we were on the
same experimental tip. “Let’s see what we can do with this. What you hear on this? Yeah, yeah.” We just came together so beautiful, man, and to this day – we just came off the road,
Bernie and Blackbird, and the same thing is happening. It just keeps getting better. So there’s something to that, embracing even the wrong stuff. I’m gonna tell you something. [to
interviewer] Is it all right? Can I tell them something? Noz Go right ahead. Bootsy Collins When I was coming up, a lot of kids had fathers. I was always, “Damn, how
come I ain’t got no dad?” I never met my dad, don’t know who he is. So it was
kind of deep for me, but after I started getting older, getting out in the
street, I realized I’m the man, I’m supposed to be the man. I’m the man that’s
not in the house. I started realizing a whole lot of things. Instead of getting
angry about me not having a father, I accepted it, that in some ways I’m filling
that void in the home. I started trying to take care of everything, I started become
responsible. I’m just as crazy or crazier than the average mug, but by not having that
father in the house I start thinking differently. Then I start thinking, “Well, why
do women pick dudes that give them babies and then leave them? That’s wrong.”
My mother, she said my dad was an alcoholic, he was this, he was that. All I
can go by is what she tells me because I don’t know. But if he hadn’t have been
who he was, I wouldn’t be here. If she hadn’t have left him when she left him,
I probably still wouldn’t be here. So, I learned how to embrace the part of,
“OK. My dad was this, my dad was that. That’s what they say. But he is the reason
that I’m here.” Then I started looking at the bigger picture. When I started
getting out in the world even more, I started looking at, “Why does my
sister keep picking losers? Why?” Then I’m, “Cut the why. It’s not even about
the why. If she hadn’t have picked the man she picked, you wouldn’t have that
great nephew that you’ve got right now that works three jobs, that takes care of
the family, that does this and does that.” I started getting an another… what do you call? Help me with these words, ya’ll. Noz Epiphany. Bootsy Collins Epiphany! That’s it. I never went to school, man. I went to psychotic bump
school. But these things help me grow not only mentally, but spiritually and
musically. I started realizing that all of these things that we don’t want to
happen to us, happen to us for a reason. And it’s up to you to grab that reason
and realize it’s for your good. No matter what you think about it, what you
think about that teacher, that boss, the girl next door, the guy next door. If
he’s getting on your nerves, it’s a reason. And the reason is for you to get
yourself together, not worry about him or her – it’s for you. This place is for
you. If you were to come in here and my man was to get on your nerves… “I love
the school, but the teachers…” If you can get your mind over that, then you
can get the lesson that you really wanna learn. But if you can’t get around that, they’ve got you. The world is designed to get you like that.
They show you all this stuff and then when you’ve caught up, it’s like, “We’ve got
them now.” Show me all that stuff, it’s cool, I embrace it. It’s all good. It can’t do you any harm unless you let it. OK? We have full control of this
stuff. I don’t know why I’m that deep, but... [applause] Jess, you brought it out, man. I was trying to be cool, man. God dog it. Noz Any other questions? Well, give it up for Bootsy Collins. [Applause]

---

Title: Clams Casino
Date: 2015-04-19
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/clams-casino

Clams Casino
Hardly known a year before, Clams Casino finished 2011 as the name on everyone’s lips. His work with A$AP Rocky pushed him there, but before that he’d been making beats for the hyperactive Lil B, including the anthem “I’m God,” which spawned an entire subgenre of people sampling the same Imogen Heap track.
In this short talk at the 2011 Red Bull Music Academy, he reflects on going from stalking rappers on Twitter to being on the receiving end of calls, the joys of flipping the same sample over and over again, and how he’s now trying to dodge the legal bullet by recreating the sounds himself.
Hosted by NOZ Good afternoon. We’re very lucky to have with us this afternoon a young producer who I believe is spearheading a new wave of experimentalism in hip-hop
production these days. He’s done work with Lil B, Soulja
Boy, A$AP Rocky, Mac
Miller and he’s also put out some
instrumental stuff on labels like Tri Angle and Type. Everybody give it up for Clams Casino. [applause] CLAMS CASINO Thanks for having me. NOZ Tell us a little about your background and upbringing for those who might not
know. CLAMS CASINO I started making beats just for fun about ten years ago when I was a freshman
in high school. I was about 14 years old, and I didn’t start trying to get my
music out there or try to work with artists or rappers until probably about four years ago.
I think 2007 was when I started going online. I’d go on MySpace and send messages out
to rappers and anybody I wanted to work with, see if could send them beats. I was
doing it a long time just on my own just to show my friends and listen to
myself, but I started about four years ago actually trying to get it out. NOZ Now, I guess even before you were pushing your beats that way, what was it that drew
you to make music on that level? CLAMS CASINO It was just something I always liked to do. Growing up, I played drums and stuff. I
always liked to mess around with a lot of instruments. I started listening to
hip-hop when I was about 12, and then I was only listening to hip-hop. From
there, that was all I was into. Then I bought some hardware, some samplers, and
just started messing around with that 'cause that’s really what I was into. NOZ Now tell us a bit about the hip-hop you were into back then. CLAMS CASINO When I was in high school, I was listening mostly to Mobb Deep, Prodigy, Wu-Tang a lot. Mostly a lot of New York stuff. Pretty hardcore gangsta rap. NOZ Now, you don’t seem like a hardcore dude. What drew you to that sort of stuff? CLAMS CASINO I don’t know. I think it’s the beats, really. Definitely, for Wu-Tang, definitely the beats
'cause I had no idea what they were talking about. I just liked the music, I
just liked the beats a lot, so I would say that’s mostly what it was. NOZ Maybe we should play this Prodigy record to give people an idea of what you
were listening to at the time. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, yeah, this is “Genesis” by Prodigy. This is one of my favorite songs.
Right around the time I started making beats this is what I was listening to. (music: Prodigy — “Genesis”) NOZ What is it about that beat that stands out to you? CLAMS CASINO I guess it’s the whole mood of it overall. I like the quality of it, the lo-fi stuff, kind of like what I do. The stuff I make myself I try to sound like that. But
just the overall mood, the vibe of it, is kind of creepy and haunting. I just always liked
that beat. NOZ Mobb Deep kind of messed with that sound, but ever since that hasn’t been the
prevailing ethic in hip-hop — creepy or moody or lo-fi. And you actually ended up
producing a track for Havoc and Mobb Deep. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, that was crazy how that happened. When I started sending stuff out online I was sending to this guy that was rapping with G-Unit and Mobb Deep at the time. His name
was Nyce. I don’t know if you
remember that guy. He was from New York and he was kind of affiliated with Mobb Deep
and G-Unit. I was sending stuff to everybody and I sent him that beat that
Havoc ended up rapping on. So I sent it to his manager. Then, about a year-and-half later his manager hit
me back and said, “Yo, Havoc ended up rapping on that.” 'Cause he ended up
managing Havoc down the road. He was, “Yeah, Havoc got the beat, ended up
rapping on it.” It was out for a while, I had no idea. That was pretty cool, a
complete surprise. I’d never even tried to send stuff straight to him, but the
way it worked out was pretty cool. NOZ It seems it was an interesting time for the way hip-hop beats have exchanged
hands and moved around. Where it’s just email files that float up in the ether. Is
that exciting? Is that frustrating that you make this beat and it just stops being
yours? CLAMS CASINO What do you mean, stops being mine? NOZ Well, you lose control over the process. CLAMS CASINO I get used to it, though, just the whole process. Some bad things happen, some good things
happen. Sometimes, yeah, it’s not in your control anymore once you put it out
online, anything can happen with it. Hopefully, something really good happens like
that. But I’m just kinda used to the process by now, taking a risk. When you throw
stuff out online, anything can happen. NOZ Does that get confusing on the legal end of things? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, very easily. NOZ Were there any occasions when you had to chase down credits or chase down money? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, every song I did with Lil B. [laughter] Chasing down credits. Every time he puts something out, he never puts anybody’s name on it, so I go around and
make sure I do that first, so that was probably some of the hardest work I do, just trying to get my name attached to everything that he’s put out. That’s definitely one of
the biggest things. But I got into the process of doing that and I got used to
that, following him really close every time he dropped it. He wouldn’t even let me
know, he’d just put something out. He’s, “Yo, I’m putting it out soon.”
Sometimes it’s six months down the road. I wouldn’t even know he’s using it.
I’m always trying to put my name on stuff, tag it, so people know. NOZ I always see, whenever a new song comes out, the first YouTube hit is on your
YouTube channel, very clearly, “Produced by Clams Casino.” Maybe we should talk a little bit about Lil B,
though. I don’t know how many people here are familiar with his work, but he’s
one of the more divisive and interesting hip-hop artists in America right now.
Maybe you can tell the people what he’s about and how you came to start working
with him. CLAMS CASINO I first started listening to him when he was in a group called the
Pack. I started hearing them
around five years ago. He wasn’t really doing what he’s doing now. They were doing
straight, uptempo, really fast stuff, kinda like hyphy. Then he started doing stuff
on his own, putting solo stuff out on MySpace and started doing really crazy stuff.
Like all freestyles and putting out five or six songs a day. I noticed that
and I hit him up when I was sending messages to people on MySpace like, “Yo,
can I send you some stuff?” I sent him a few beats, and he did some freestyles on them. He was putting out so much stuff, just out there, really crazy stuff. I didn’t know what to think of it at first, then I started getting into it. I liked the stuff he did before a lot. I was like, “What the hell happened to him? What is he doing?” Then I really got into it. The first stuff he was doing on my beats,
just freestyling really ridiculous stuff. I thought it was so funny and
I kept sending him stuff and it just happened from there. That was the end of ’08 when I first started working with him and talking with him. NOZ Is that liberating as a producer to see someone doing such wild music? Did you feel like you could start doing different things production-wise? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, it made me look at stuff differently ‘cause I didn’t know what I
thought of it at first. It was a whole ‘nother direction. NOZ Well, let’s go into what I think stands as your breakout production for Lil B.
This is called “I’m God.” Do you want to tell us about it before we play it? CLAMS CASINO There’s not much background behind it. I made it for someone else, probably a
few months before I sent it to Lil B. I had it a for a while but I never sent it to him because I didn’t think he’d like it. I had it laying around. I never
sent it to him and I was sending him a bunch of stuff before that. Then I sent
it to him and he freaked out. He flipped. He was like, “Yo, are you crazy? What is
this?” I think I sent him a couple more the same day too, but he flipped out when he heard it and he recorded it a few days later. He loved it and here it is. (music: Lil B – “I’m God” / applause) NOZ You’re probably a little too humble to say this but this has become a subgenre-defining track, right? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, I hope so. NOZ Tell us a little bit about the elements that went into making that track. CLAMS CASINO The main thing that I liked was the vocal sample. I usually use them. For the past
few years, I’ve only been doing vocal samples. I don’t know why. I started
looking at it and I liked the voice and I’ve used that song for so many
other things. I was just trying to see what else I could do with it. I’ve used
it for different kinds of beats. I usually take one source. I’ll take a song or
a sample and make like three or four different beats out of it, try to make
them all sound real different and see how far I could push it in each
direction. So I usually end up making a lot of stuff out of the same sample. NOZ That’s an Imogen Heap sample? CLAMS CASINO Yes. NOZ What was it that drew you to her work? How did you find that? CLAMS CASINO My friend sent me another one of her songs. Not that one. I
forget the name of it. He sent me an a capella and was, “Yo, you’ve gotta try this, see what you can do with it.” I’d never heard of her. I tried messing with the one he sent me and I couldn’t do
anything with it, but then I started searching for more of her stuff, that’s
when I found that one. I found “Just for Now.” I got a sample from that. After
my friend told me about her, I went and looked for some on my own and found
some other stuff from her. NOZ I hear you have an interesting method in finding samples. CLAMS CASINO I used to. I haven’t done that for a long time. You mean just searching with a
search engine and stuff? I used to use file-sharing services like LimeLinx and
Bearshare, and just type any random words in and anything that came up, stuff
from all over the world that I wouldn’t know what it is. Just to find
different things that I wouldn’t normally find, really. Just to get a variety of
different stuff, just a challenge finding new stuff I had never heard. I’d type
in words and whatever came up and whatever looked cool, I’d just download it. NOZ What were some of those words? CLAMS CASINO Anything. I don’t know. Colors, green, stuff like that. If I see another word
in one of those results, I’d just search that and keep it going. But I haven’t
done that in a while because I just saved up so much stuff over the years. I’ve got huge folders and folders of so much stuff that I haven’t even had to search for
a long time. NOZ Getting back to “I’m God,” it seems that specific Imogen Heap sample has
become a standard not just in your catalog, but among a lot of your peers. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, I’ve heard a lot of people using it. Even before I did, there was some big song
that sampled her, so people were doing it before me. Seems like a lot of people are
doing it now, especially Lil B’s producers. There’s a lot of people using that same
exact song for Lil B. People think I make them but I don’t. NOZ Do you feel like they’re biting your style? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, a little bit. NOZ Maybe we should play the original of that. CLAMS CASINO Yeah. (music: Imogen Heap – “Just for Now”) NOZ So yeah, you kind of decimated that. CLAMS CASINO Yeah. NOZ What kind of gear are you working with? CLAMS CASINO Right now I just use software. I used to use samplers and hardware stuff, but
right now, I just use the laptop. For the past probably couple of years, just software and a laptop. NOZ Do you want to specify as software 'cause you’re in a room full of people who get psyched about that stuff. CLAMS CASINO Oh yeah, Sony ACID Pro. NOZ Now, I think one of the cool things too about “I’m God” is that it’s inspired this
whole kind of YouTube tribute movement where a lot of people have been rebuilding the track on their
own. How do you feel about that? CLAMS CASINO I think it’s funny. It started 'cause so many people wanted it and were asking for it and I hadn’t put it out yet. NOZ The instrumental? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, the instrumental. People were talking about it for so long. They’re like, “This beat, I need this beat, I wanna rap over it.” I just didn’t put it out, I don’t know
why, probably a year and a half after the original song came out. I think
that’s how it started. People making remakes and stuff. There’s so many of them now on YouTube. NOZ Have you found any that come close? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, some of them I was surprised that some of the people flipped it and actually came pretty close. But not most of them. NOZ I guess you’ve spent a lot of time in the computer in your world. Can you tell us
a bit about your day-to-day life, what you’re doing when you’re not chopping
up Imogen Heap samples? CLAMS CASINO Lately, that’s almost all I’ve been doing. I’ve just been in the studio. I just finished school this spring. This whole summer, that’s pretty much what I
do all day, pretty much chopping up samples. That’s my main thing right now, what I’ve been up to. NOZ What were you studying in school? CLAMS CASINO Physical therapy. NOZ Is that something you think you’re gonna pursue or is this kind of the route now? CLAMS CASINO I was planning on doing it, but I don’t know, it’s like… [laughs] I wanna make
sure I finish school and stuff. It’s not like I stopped going, but all this
music stuff is working out on its own. I was never planning to do it, but it’s looking good now. I’m just
glad I got it out of the way. I can work in physical therapy if I wanted to.
We’ll see what happens. Not yet. NOZ It seems like the new agey-ness of your sound complements physical therapy too. CLAMS CASINO A lot of people have said that. I never thought about it, but I guess it’s true. NOZ But right now is probably a good time to pursue the music thing because last week you had some beats on the number-one album in America. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, stuff is working out on its own, it’s pretty crazy. I just wanna see where I can go with it. NOZ That would be Mac Miller’s debut album. How did you come to work with him? CLAMS CASINO Actually, he kinda just shouted me out on Twitter. He was like, “Yo, I need to work with this dude. He’s got a cool sound.” I ended up chilling with him later. I think some
of his boys showed him stuff on my mixtape, an EP or something, and he liked it a lot. So he shouted me out on Twitter. He sent me a message like, “Yo, I wanna work with you.” He gave me his number, I just started sending him stuff and it took off from there. NOZ Is that weird now that the roles are reversed? You used to have to hustle
people on MySpace to get attention and now they’re coming to you. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, it’s the exact opposite now, so many people coming at me. It’s much
easier. Thank god it’s like that because it’s not fun doing it the other way around. NOZ Let’s play something from the Mac Miller record. This is called “My Team.” (music: Mac Miller – “My Team” / applause) When I talked with you a few months ago, you mentioned that you hadn’t had the chance to meet many of the artists you work with. Is that changing as your career progresses? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, it is a little bit. Most of the people that I was working with, I would just
email and stuff, so I never got in the studio with them or anything. It’s definitely changing now. I’m meeting more people and getting the chance to hang out with everybody, so it’s cool. I’m glad it’s like that now. NOZ Does that change your production at all, having that kind of access? CLAMS CASINO I wouldn’t say so. I’m still doing the same thing, I still make stuff on my
own time by myself and send it out to them. So I wouldn’t say it changes the whole process. Yet, at least. NOZ Now, when you’re making a beat, say, you’re making “My Team,” for example, do
you have Mac Miller in mind or is it just a constant workflow? CLAMS CASINO I usually try not to think about who I’m going to make it for or send it to,
'cause then I end up thinking too hard and it doesn’t work right. I kinda just make
stuff and whatever happens, I’ll just follow that idea. If I hear something, I
go with it, but I try not to think about artists or who can be on top of it too much.
It just messes me up, so I try not to really think about that. NOZ About how many beats do you make in a day or a week? CLAMS CASINO It’s hard to say ‘cause I don’t sit down and make them once. I kinda just start them
and then I’ll have it about a quarter done or half done and then I’ll do
something else. I’d say I probably start about three a day, something like
that. Then I’ll go back to that, put the pieces together, use something from one. So it’s hard to explain now. But every time I sit down, I probably start the beginning of
three beats, but not finish them. It takes me a long time to finish them. NOZ You kind of blew my mind a few minutes ago when you told me the origins of this next record we’re gonna play by A$AP Rocky. Can you break down that process for the crowd? CLAMS CASINO This one we’re talking about is actually the same sample as “I’m God” from Imogen Heap. It’s the same sample, but I flipped it another way. I don’t know how many beats I’ve made with that song, but this is one that sounds very different to “I’m God.” It’s hard to even tell what it is, but it’s the same sample. NOZ You also said you broke it off a rejected piece of a remix to a Lil B song. CLAMS CASINO Oh yeah, that’s what you’re talking about. Yeah, this beat for Rocky called “Bass”…
It was actually something I sent it to Lil B, but he was, “Oh, it’s too fast.” He liked half of
it, but it switched up in the middle and got really fast and he was, “I can’t use that.” So he hit me back and was, “Yo, slow it all down.” So I took off
the fast part, I kept the part that he liked, I made the rest of it slower to match it and then that became “I’m the Devil.” NOZ Which is a Lil B song? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, that he recorded called “I’m the Devil.” So he told me to get rid of the fast part. This beat is pretty much the fast part of that beat, but then I slowed it down again because Rocky likes everything really slow. So I just took the whole beat and made it
slow and that’s how that happened. NOZ Let’s check out “Bass” by A$AP Rocky. (music: A$AP Rocky – “Bass” / applause) Now, A$AP Rocky is another hotly pursued rapper at the moment. How did you end up working with him? CLAMS CASINO I actually found some of his stuff online. He had some songs up on YouTube, not videos – just some songs of his. I think he had like one video, so I saw it on one of his boys’ websites that I check a lot. I saw it on there. He had one video and a bunch of songs on YouTube, a few actually, not too many. I just wanted to send him some stuff. This was in April I think of this year. So the guy that runs the website I saw it on, I was like, “Yo, do you know how I can get in touch with Rocky?” 'Cause I couldn’t find any way to hit him up, he didn’t even have Twitter or anything and that’s what I normally use. He was, “Yeah, here’s his email. We were just talking about your instrumental tape last night.” They’re friends, I didn’t know that, and they said they were talking about my tape, so I was like, “Oh, cool.” So I sent him some stuff, I sent him three or four beats, I told him who I was and was like, “Yo, I wanna see if you’ll work on some stuff.” He hit me right back and was like, “You’re like my favorite producer right now. I’ve already recorded some stuff on your beats.” He already had stuff done from my instrumental tape. He hit me
right back. His song “Demons,”
he had already recorded that before I ever hit him up. He sent that right back
to me. I liked it and I kept sending him stuff from there. The first thing he
recorded was “Wassup” and I
really liked that, so I just kept hitting him with a lot of stuff. NOZ You’ve done some shows with Rocky since, right? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, I did two with him pretty recently, last month. NOZ What’s that like, hearing your music into a live setting? CLAMS CASINO It’s cool. It’s fun, it’s different. I’ve done some stuff myself and a few shows with him. It’s cool, it’s different, I like it. I had fun. NOZ At the same time as… You’re a rising talent in the hip-hop world, making beats
for rappers, you’ve also drawn attention from this experimental world. You’ve
put out vinyl-only instrumental projects with Type and Tri Angle. Was that the
same situation where they just hit you up? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, they just approached me. When I put out the instrumental tape of all the
beats I’d done for people, it just attracted a whole ‘nother group of people
that I didn’t even really think would be interested in it. People were saying it’s a whole different kind of thing, it’s not hip-hop, it’s electronic music. So it
attracted a whole 'nother crowd. Those labels just hit me up were really into
the music, so I started talking to them. I had a bunch of stuff that I was trying to get rappers on sitting around. So I was just like, “Let me just put some of it out. You don’t need rappers on it, people wanna listen to it without rappers.” So I had stuff laying around that I’d sent out but nobody was using, so that became the EP I put out. NOZ Were you aware of that world of music? Did it influence you? CLAMS CASINO No, I would check out some of the stuff. I’d hear people compare what I do to
all this other stuff. I would check it out, but before that, I wasn’t into it. I’ve found a lot of cool stuff since then that I like but not before. NOZ Who are some of the other instrumental artists that you’ve found? CLAMS CASINO Stuff on Tri Angle, some of their artists like Balam Acab. He’s got some crazy stuff and I’m
surprised by how much it sounds like mine. I like his stuff a lot and some
other guys on the label, but that’s pretty much it. NOZ It seems like the worlds of hip-hop and experimental music, at least on the
underground level, are merging. If you took some of the Rocky instrumentals,
they’d be kind of the same thing you’d hear on these labels. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, definitely. It’s cool that so many different people, people that don’t even listen to hip-hop, will listen to it now if they don’t know me from that.
It’s funny, when the Rocky tape came out, I saw people online saying, “Oh man, Clams is working with rappers now?” I was like, “What? What do you mean?” “I can’t believe Clams did a whole tape with a rapper, and it’s awesome.” They had no idea that I ever even made hip-hop. I thought that was funny. But it’s cool that they are into that and don’t listen to hip-hop, but now they’ll check it out. NOZ Let’s play something from one of your instrumental projects. What do you
think, “Gorilla”? CLAMS CASINO Yeah. (music: Clams Casino – “Gorilla” / applause) NOZ Now, that was originally intended as an instrumental you would send a rap
artists? CLAMS CASINO That was actually kind of half and half. It could go either way. Even before I put
out the original instrumental mixtape out, somebody originally gave me the idea of doing instrumental stuff. So that one was half and half. I did send that to rappers,
but I was thinking also that it might be cool just as an instrumental. That’s why
that one, instead of just a beat, is formatted like an actual song. It
involves a lot more than a regular hip-hop beat. But I did send that to a
rapper. I think I sent it to Soulja Boy. He was the first rapper I sent that to. NOZ We haven’t talked about your relationship with Soulja Boy. How did that come to
pass and what came of that? CLAMS CASINO Lil B sent him — I think he liked the “I’m God” beat a lot. I was trying to send
him stuff. I noticed they started working a lot and I was, “Yo, I’m trying to
get some stuff to Soulja.” He was, “Definitely, he likes ‘I’m God’ a lot.” So
I was, “Cool.” I sent stuff to B, and he would shoot over to him and he didn’t end up
doing anything. He did rap on “I’m God” first. That was the first thing I ended up doing with him, a freestyle on that beat. But I never really talked
to him. Then, about a year later, Lil B hit me up again, “Soulja wants some
sample beats and stuff.” So I sent him three – that was one of them. I sent him the one that became “All I
Need” and “The World Needs
Change” and that one, “Gorilla.”
So I sent him those three and he ended up using two of them. Then he wanted to do a
whole mixtape. “Yo, I wanna do a whole tape with you, with stuff like this, all
sampled.” It never happened, but I kept sending him stuff. We did end up doing
a lot of songs, but never put a whole tape out. NOZ Seems like Soulja’s in a weird point in his career where he kind of wants to be a more adventurous and experimental artist. CLAMS CASINO He does a lot of different things, he experiments, so I think that’s cool of him to do that. More people should do that. That’s what I like about him, he
does try a lot of different stuff. People would never expect him to rap on
stuff that I sent him, but he wanted stuff like that and he used it. NOZ Do you have any of those Soulja tracks? I don’t have them on me. CLAMS CASINO I don’t think so. Actually, I might have them on my iPad. I can check. NOZ Yeah. Hope you guys don’t mind. [Clam searches iPad] I’m just gonna play a
little more from the Rainforest EP while… CLAMS CASINO Yeah, I’ve got them. I’ve got one. I’ve got “All I Need.” (music: Soulja Boy – “All I Need” / applause) NOZ So Soulja has a line opening up that records where he says, “I never got into the music industry to make money.” That seems like the prevailing ethos for a
lot of you guys in your circle. Is that safe to say? CLAMS CASINO Definitely. Especially me. I never really thought about that. The guys I work with a lot like Main Attrakionz, they just make music to make music. They put out so much stuff I can’t keep up with them and up until recently they’ve not really made anything off it. They just love to do it. I like working with guys that think like that. NOZ With that in mind, what are you working on now? What’s in the pipeline? CLAMS CASINO A lot. I can’t even keep up with it, but there’s a lot right now. I hate to ruin the
surprise, there’s a lot of big stuff, but I don’t even now what I can talk
about. NOZ Can you give us one name? CLAMS CASINO Mm-mm. NOZ [silence] Alright. We can open up the floor to questions. AUDIENCE MEMBER Your EP on Tri Angle got a lot of praise and I was wondering if you see yourself working more on instrumentals. Maybe you wanna put some vocals on
there and work with someone, but will you be working more on solo stuff, Clams Casino stuff in the future? CLAMS CASINO Will I be working on more solo stuff, like instrumental? AUDIENCE MEMBER I don’t wanna say instrumental ‘cause you can always collaborate, but not just
producing beats for rappers so much in the future. CLAMS CASINO I definitely see myself doing more solo stuff down the road. There’s a lot of
that out right now and I’m going back to working with artists for a little
bit, but I like to switch things up a lot. I get bored fast, and I’m sure when
I’m ready I’ll be doing a lot more instrumental stuff. I like it, and I’ll be doing that too. AUDIENCE MEMBER Just one more. I don’t know if you still do this, but it used to be that if
someone put one of your beats on YouTube, you’d go there and drop a comment
saying, “Hey, I made this beat, thanks.” I think that’s unusual 'cause producers,
usually when they start generating a buzz stop interacting so much online. I was wondering why you do that, why you think that’s important? CLAMS CASINO First up, I’ve got to say there’s a YouTube channel that posts up all my stuff
and has pictures of me, but it’s not me. So, I don’t know if that’s the one
you’re talking about. Audience Member I don’t think so. I read an interview with you where you mentioned you do
that. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, I do that. If stuff’s not labeled… I’ve been used to doing that for so long. People
don’t give credit for producers when they put stuff out online. So I got used to
doing that every time. Every time somebody would put a song out, I’d just go around and post it up as much as I could just so people would know. If it’s not there I’ll still do that. But now people are putting my name on it more. I don’t have to ask. But if it’s not there, I still do stuff like that. AUDIENCE MEMBER I’ve got a couple of questions for you. You were talking earlier about how
once you send your beats out through emails and stuff, it gets out of your hands at that
point. Does a song ever come back to you from an MC and you’ll hear it and
just cringe at it? Has that ever happened? CLAMS CASINO [pause] I’m sure it has. I can’t think of anything. AUDIENCE MEMBER You don’t have to give me any names. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, I’m sure it has, I’m just trying to think of specific times. I don’t
know. If it’s somebody that I don’t like, I wouldn’t send them beats in the first
place. It’s rare that someone I like and will reach out to, that they won’t do
something I like on top of it. So, most of the time, no, but I’m sure it has. AUDIENCE MEMBER One more question. If you could pick one MC of all time to work with, who
would it be? Or group. CLAMS CASINO I would say Cam’ron. NOZ Good choice. Maybe we should play “Killa Cam” 'cause you mentioned that as a big influence. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, it’s another one of my favorite songs and a production I really like
from the Heatmakerz. This is off Cam’ron’s CD, Purple Haze. (music: Cam’ron – “Killa Cam” / applause) NOZ I don’t know if we have to listen to Cam’ron’s skits. But yeah, it seems
like you can hear Heatmakerz doing that multi-tiered vocal sample thing there. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, that was one of my favorite hip-hop productions ever. NOZ Do we have any other questions? AUDIENCE MEMBER You mentioned you don’t make beats with rappers in mind. Have you ever sent a
beat to lots of people and lots of them have come back and lots of them have come back and said, “I want to do this”? CLAMS CASINO That happens all the time. AUDIENCE MEMBER How do you decide? CLAMS CASINO Usually, people don’t mind. People just put out stuff for free all the time online now. There’ll be so many songs out with the same beat. Sometimes, it’s a problem. If it’s going to go on somebody’s CD, then obviously it’s a bigger deal 'cause only one person can really have it. There haven’t been too many times where people get mad about it – “Oh, you sent it to him too, you sent it to him too?” 'Cause I send so much stuff out at once and usually people don’t respond at all. I’m not gonna sit around and wait for two months for someone to answer and say they’ll do it. I’ll send it to someone else. I send stuff all over the place and usually it happens because people don’t use it fast enough. All right, I’ll send it to someone else. So it does happen a lot where you have two or three people on the same beat. AUDIENCE MEMBER I’m just curious at what point you picked up management and how that changed your workflow and creativity. It feels like you hustled really hard just to get shit to people. CLAMS CASINO Earlier this year, I put the instrumental tape out in March and started talking to people from record labels who hit me up and said, “Send me some music.” I just started talking to some of those people and met people through there. I met this guy from Warner Brothers, and he was like, “Send me some music.” So I sent him stuff and he was like, “You
have nobody managing you. I have a guy that might be able to help you out.” I started talking to some people and they were like, “We’ll see how it works. We’ll help you out a little bit.” It wasn’t an official thing, just if it works for both of us down the road, we can make it official. So I started
having people help me early this year, around the spring, and it has helped a
lot, a little direction and organization, so I'm glad it happened like that.
But doing online stuff, on the internet, it took a long time until someone
came along and helped me out. But it’s definitely a lot of good guidance now. AUDIENCE MEMBER You worked with a lot of rappers the past couple of years. I was just wondering if there are any singers or vocalists. ‘Cause you do a lot of vocal sampling, but not really singers. So I’m just wondering if you have any interest in that. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, that’s definitely something I want to do soon. I’ve got something coming
out soon that I can’t really talk about yet. [laughs] NOZ Secrets of Clams Casino. CLAMS CASINO A lot of secret stuff in the works, but you’re definitely gonna hear about it
soon. It’s something I’m interested in and I think a lot of my stuff would be
perfect for singers who actually put melodies on instead of just rapping. So
that’s definitely something I’ve wanted to do for a while. So I’ve got some
stuff coming out like that and hopefully a lot more in the future. AUDIENCE MEMBER I’m curious if Imogen Heap has reached out to you about anything. CLAMS CASINO No, she hasn’t yet. About legal stuff? AUDIENCE MEMBER Either that or just, “Hey, I liked how you ripped apart my vocals.” [laughs] CLAMS CASINO She hasn’t said anything, but hopefully she’ll say something. I haven’t even tried to reach out to her, but I’d like to hear what she thinks about it. That would be cool to see what she has to say. AUDIENCE MEMBER Especially that there’s this whole scene of people sampling one song of hers. CLAMS CASINO Yeah, it’d be interesting to see what she has to say about it. Hope I can get
in touch with her some time. NOZ Put your manager on it. AUDIENCE MEMBER Have you ever had people make comparisons with the British
shoegaze bands? Are you familiar
with this late-’80s, early-’90s bands like My Bloody Valentine and Slowdive? CLAMS CASINO I’ve heard people say shoegaze, but I don’t really know what it is or what
bands they are. I know My Bloody Valentine, I know stuff by them. I’ve
definitely heard people say that, but I don’t know much of the music. AUDIENCE MEMBER There’s so many elements; there’s the drones, the long drones, and sweet
vocals against quite intense and overpowering sound. I was just wondered if
you’d listened to any of it ‘cause it seems like that’s something you could sample. CLAMS CASINO A lot of people have said that to me. I’ve got to check out the music ‘cause
it sounds like something I would definitely like, but I’m not familiar with
the bands. People say shoegaze all the time, but I wouldn’t really know what they meant. Participant Also, you seem like a pretty easy-going guy, but there’s this emotional intensity in the music. Do you find it’s an outlet for these feelings? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, I guess. Usually, when I’m making stuff I’m just hanging out, I’m relaxed. I guess my feelings come out in there, I don’t really know. I’m not angry, making crazy songs. I’m usually just chilling. That’s how I make the most stuff. It’s really hard to explain that. AUDIENCE MEMBER You’re not a troubled artist like the Marilyn
Manson of hip-hop. CLAMS CASINO [laughs] No, definitely not that. AUDIENCE MEMBER I’ve just wondered if you’ve had any copyright issues thus far and whether
that’s something that’s a concern to you, using vocal samples especially,
which are more obvious than taking a drum sample or something like that. CLAMS CASINO It’s kind of tough. All the stuff I’ve been making for the last few months,
I’ve been trying to recreate the sound that I usually do without copyrighted
samples. It took me a while to get used to it, but now I’m getting in a groove
of taking other stuff and really making it sound like that. So, it’s definitely
an issue and it sucks ‘cause sometimes you can’t put stuff out that you want.
So I’m just trying to recreate the stuff and make it sound like something I usually do. It took me a while to get used to it, but now I think I’ve found
out how to do it. So I’m excited about that and I have no worries now about
any of the copyright stuff. AUDIENCE MEMBER Where does your name come from? CLAMS CASINO It doesn’t mean anything, honestly. [laughs] I just kept it ‘cause it was catchy and
easy to remember. It doesn’t have any stories to it. Sorry about that. NOZ Do people call you Clams frequently? CLAMS CASINO Yeah, now they do. People that I’ll just meet, they’ll call me Clams. They don’t know my real name. I don’t mind. NOZ Any more questions? Alright. I guess we can leave you guys with one more
track. What do you think? CLAMS CASINO This is A$AP Rocky featuring Main Attrakionz. It’s called “Leaf.” (music: A$AP Rocky feat. Main Attrakionz – “Leaf” / applause) NOZ What was going on with that vocal sample at the end? CLAMS CASINO I didn’t put that in. Rocky’s engineer put in that ODB sample like the intro and the stuff at the end. I didn’t send it to them like that. They put that on. So I don’t know, but it’s pretty cool. NOZ Everybody, give a round of applause for Clams Casino. CLAMS CASINO Thank you for having me.

---

Title: Dre Skull
Date: 2015-04-19
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/dre-skull-lecture/

Dre Skull
Raised to the sounds of the East Coast underground freak-punk scene, Dre Skull perceives urban music culture as a holistic affair and follows the paths of Don Was, Rick Rubin and Heavy D in terms of working with artists from various fields. After lacing beats for heavy hitters such as Beenie Man, Popcaan and Pusha T, the mighty Major Lazer asked Dre Skull to co-produce Snoop Dogg’s reggae-fied reincarnation as Snoop Lion.
In his lecture at the 2013 Red Bull Music Academy, the vybz master talked about how he became one of Jamaica’s most in-demand beatmakers.
Hosted by DAVIDE BORTOT Our guest this afternoon is a DJ/producer from Brooklyn. He’s been making
music for about ten years now, runs a rather diverse and also rather excellent
record label called Mixpak, and in some
interesting turn of events has become one of the world’s most sought-after
dancehall producers, working with the likes of Beenie Man, Vybz Kartel, Popcaan and some guy called
Snoop Lion. So, there’s a lot of stuff going on, I think a lot of
stories to tell. Give him a very warm welcome. [applause] So, maybe shall we play some music to start off? This is a record that came
out two weeks ago, three weeks ago? When did it come out? Dre Skull Four weeks ago. DAVIDE BORTOT Four weeks ago, OK, sorry. (music: Dre Skull feat. Megan James & Popcaan – “First Time” / applause) DAVIDE BORTOT So, I think there’s quite a lot to be said about the music, the influences on
this record, but maybe we could start off by you telling us how this record
actually came about, because it has quite an interesting and long history,
right? Dre Skull Yeah, I mean it’s definitely kind of an interesting story behind it. The
instrumental was a riddim I had released last summer, called the “Loudspeaker
Riddim.” If you’re not familiar
with dancehall riddim culture, it’s quite common to get multiple songs written
on the same instrumental track. So, the original release had Popcaan, Beenie
Man, Natalie Storm and Machel Montano. It did quite well as a riddim release and Popcaan’s track
“The System” was pretty well-received in Jamaica and elsewhere. Machel
Montano, who’s a soca artist from Trinidad, his track was also pretty well-
received. I basically got approached by Puma, the brand, and they were
interested in me doing a new version on the riddim and the director was, “We’d
like to get a new female vocal.” I thought it might be an interesting
opportunity to move outside the dancehall, Caribbean context. The lead
vocalist is Megan James who’s in Purity Ring, if you’re familiar, an
electronic act, with a guest verse from Popcaan. So, I reached out to Megan
James’ management, just because I was a fan of her work, and despite being on
tour and being quite busy she was interested, liked the track. So she was able
to record that, I think, in a hotel room while she was on tour. Then I thought
it could use a little bit more energy and it would be interesting to bring it
back with Popcaan. Popcaan actually, I think, delivered three different verses
and I think the first two, they were good but they didn’t feel quite right, so
I ended up flying down to Kingston for a very quick 24-hour trip. I think I
went in the studio at midnight, worked until 6am and flew out the next
morning, and so he got that track done. I think one thing that draws me to
dancehall, particularly as a producer, is just that you have this unique
opportunity to hear different vocalists and different songs on the track or
the beat that you make. It’s really interesting to see the different energy
and the different vibe that people can find in a track, so I’m really happy
with what she found and what Popcaan brought to the table. DAVIDE BORTOT If you look at the original “Loudspeaker” release, the artists on that riddim
are already pretty diverse. You’ve got Machel Montana, who’s a soca artist,
and you have Popcaan, who’s a dancehall artist but has a very melodic way of
singing, so it’s very different vocalists and very different energy levels.
How do you approach a riddim like that as a producer? Do you have any specific
vocals in mind, then see what other people do with it, or would you rather try
and create something which can work for quite a lot of different vocalists? Dre Skull I guess, not just in the dancehall context but in general, one of my favourite
things is bringing a track that inevitably, in the process of making, I’ve
heard it hundreds of times, basically, and so it is imprinted on my mind as an
instrumental. So, one of my favourite things is to take it to a vocalist and
that’s where it really becomes a collaboration, and it’s quite often that I’m
just completely blown away or very surprised with choices a vocalist will
make. I mean, Megan’s vocal on this is very laid back and ethereal. I know her
work so it wasn’t a complete surprise, but it’s not exactly what I pictured on
the riddim, but at the same time totally excited to get that back. Same thing
with the Popcaan version, on his track “The System.” He did a very heartfelt
kind of sufferation song about ghetto youth. Having lived with the track for
some years before it got voiced, I was just surprised that that’s what he
heard in the track. So, it’s kind of a thrill to see what different people
find. As a producer I don’t necessarily want to dictate to a vocalist, like,
“This is exactly what I want you to do.” Sometimes I do have that conversation
and it’s a back and forth conversation, but a lot of times, if I feel like the
artist is a competent creator, I want them to bring their own thing to the
table and I don’t want to step on their toes before they get to offer that up. DAVIDE BORTOT You mentioned “The System.” We could play the video. That was a huge record in
the dancehall scene, I think, and it’s also quite different from what we just
heard, despite the fact it’s the same riddim track. (music: Popcaan - “The System” / applause) DAVIDE BORTOT You talk about this as if it was the most normal thing in the world: “Yeah, I
flew out to Jamaica, 24 hours, just recorded Popcaan.” But how did it actually
happen that you would start working with these people? I mean, for those of
you who don’t know, this guy is a huge deal. He’s probably one of the three
biggest reggae dancehall artists right now, arguably the biggest. So, when did
you first start working with artists of that calibre from Jamaica? Dre Skull Basically, as a producer I’ve always wanted to be working with vocalists and I
think it was probably 2008. I’d been working with different people in the US
and trying to work with different people in the US, but I had made a decision
that I wanted to reach out and try to work with some Jamaican vocalists. At
that point I had no real connections and I hadn’t really been down to Jamaica
to work, so basically, through the Internet I found some people in the world
of dancehall. DAVIDE BORTOT What does that mean, “through the Internet, some people”? Dre Skull Essentially, just asking around and getting kind of like, “Oh, you need to
talk to this person, you need to talk to that person,” sort of thing. So,
through my work as a DJ and just talking with different DJs, and they tell me
to call this person or email this person. I basically was able to work with
Sizzla and that was something where I didn’t get to meet him, and I still
haven’t met him, but basically I had a riddim, sent it down through email. He
sent a ProTools session back and then I finished mixing and making the song. I
repeated that process with Vybz Kartel and when I reached out to him, he was
obviously a very big artist but he still hadn’t hit his full peak. His track
“Ramping Shop” was just building buzz in the US and that went on to be a
‘Billboard Hot 100 radio play’-type of song that built up him that much more,
so it was a little bit fortuitous. Again, that was facilitated through the
Internet. I guess, basically he voiced a track for me called “Yuh
Love” and I didn’t really get to
interact with him about the track too much, and I didn’t know what I would be
getting back. But he sent this track “Yuh Love,” which was a very romantic
love song, a little bit unusual for him and it just took on a life of its own
and became a big hit on its own. Ultimately, I guess, it was very fortuitous
and a bit lucky, but through that song, then people started coming to me,
emailing me, and saying, “We’d like to do this with you or do that with you.”
About maybe nine months or so after “Yuh Love” had been out and had been
building, I started going down to Jamaica, so I got to meet Kartel and it went
from there. DAVIDE BORTOT You’re originally from Massachusetts, right? Where exactly? Dre Skull Actually, I was born in Cleveland and my family moved around but my folks live
up in Massachusetts, but I’ve been in Brooklyn for about eight years and lived
down in Philadelphia before that. DAVIDE BORTOT Why did you move to Brooklyn, because of the music, or was there any other
reason? Dre Skull It was a bunch of friends of mine were living in a warehouse in Brooklyn and a
room opened up. There wasn’t a strong reason, just something that happened. DAVIDE BORTOT You’ve been making music for maybe ten years, a bit more, but your first
release, if I’m not wrong, was in 2007-ish, and I think people started to
notice more what you do in 2009 when you launched your own label. What did you
do between 2002 and 2007? Dre Skull Well, I was doing a lot of different sorts of things in New York. But in terms
of creative pursuits, when I moved into Brooklyn I moved into this four-storey
warehouse and pretty much everyone, apart from myself, had gone to art school
and was pretty engaged in the New York art world. A number of us were doing
different performance-type art or installation sort of things with video and
audio, so that was kind of my original creative output when I got to New York.
A lot of that work was reworking popular culture, say, with editing videos or
reappropriating different pieces of music. It was good and it was interesting
and we had some level of success, although doing performance art you cannot
really make too much money. [laughs] I mean, there’s nothing to sell, it’s a
one-time thing, so there’s a lot of effort and it’s this ephemeral sort of
thing that’s basically gone. But ultimately, working in a group, people had
different ideas about what was important to them and so forth. For me, at a
certain point I realized I don’t want to be deconstructing culture, popular
music or popular films or video content, I’d rather try to build it up from
scratch. I think that was the real shift for me. I was just like, “I would
rather be making popular music or songs that have a life of their own instead
of tinkering with someone else’s songs and video.” DAVIDE BORTOT The whole idea of making popular music, pop music, was that always something
that was of interest to you, something that inspired you? Because, obviously
you came up through the whole club scene at large, being a DJ, producer,
putting out 12” releases and being somewhat of a household name in that world.
Now you’re working with people like Snoop Dogg and other people that I’m not
allowed to mention, so that’s quite a journey, that’s quite a transition and I
think a very different type of working as well. Was it always your ambition to
be that type of producer or did it just accidentally happen? Dre Skull That’s a good question. I think making pop music, and I use that term very
broadly, for me, working with these dancehall artists is making popular music.
It’s within a genre but it’s songs that take on life as songs and I guess
that’s really what I mean when I say pop music. I think the draw there is
partially just because I felt it was the hardest thing for me to do. It wasn’t
like I went, naturally I know how to make pop music and that’s what I’m going
to go do. It was this challenge like, how is pop music made, or as a producer,
how do you mix full songs and refine them? In a way it was just the challenge
of it that was somehow a draw. And I think over the course of my life, songs
have lived in my mind or in my life more than just like, say, a club track or
something. Those can be amazing, beautiful things and they have certain
contexts where they work absolutely perfectly, but there’s something about
songs that had a real pull on me. DAVIDE BORTOT Having worked with popular culture on a more theoretical level as a
performance artist, does that inform your work if you try and write a pop song
these days, or is it something that you try to keep away from your creative
process? Dre Skull I don’t know, that’s a good question. I mean, I don’t come to music as a
super-skilled musician. I didn’t grow up playing piano or guitar or something
like that in a really formal way, so I think for me it started by looking at
songs and having to take them apart. I don’t know about theoretically, but
just conceptually like, “This is a verse, how many bars is that? This is pre-chorus, how many bars is that and how does that lead into the chorus?” Just
really analyzing music in that way and trying to analyse it enough that it
becomes intuitive. Then you can take different things from different genres or
different types of songs and create new songs using some of that DNA, if you
will. DAVIDE BORTOT Speaking of different genres, on your label you release quite a lot of
different music. You have a punk band, you’ve put out some New Orleans bounce
stuff, some clubby electronic stuff, obviously dancehall. Did you always
listen to all these kinds of genres, or was there anything that attracted you
in the first place? Dre Skull I think probably with my love of rap music and hip-hop, that music has not
always, but it’s often relied on sampling. When I look back that’s what I
think happened, whether it’s a DJ Premier track or Public Enemy or whoever, depending on how you relate to music in general. For me as a
producer I’m kind of wondering, “Where are those samples coming from?” And
tracing those roots to the original source material. Quite naturally, you’re
going to end up listening to a wide, wide range. I think many hip-hop
producers will tell you, “I listen to everything,” and I think it’s that kind
of ear, of realising there’s amazing music across all genres. DAVIDE BORTOT How did you actually start making music, then? Dre Skull I think I started not with a computer but with a four-track, with a little
cassette tape. In some ways there’s a certain freedom to that because it’s
very limited what you can do. You can set the tape to play at different speeds
and record at different speeds and do different experimental stuff like that.
But I quickly graduated to a computer and, really, it’s as a producer, just a
solitary sort of pursuit. It became a hobby and then a passion and now more of
a career. DAVIDE BORTOT What’s your set-up these days then? Do you still try to limit yourself in
terms of the equipment, now that you probably have access to more
professional, more well-staffed studios? Dre Skull Yeah, I think I do. I know some producers make a conceptual decision like,
“I’m making music with this drum machine and this synth and that’s what this
project is,” or something very defined like that. I don’t quite do that but I
pretty much strictly make music on a laptop, whether I’m in the studio or at
home or in a hotel room or anywhere. That freedom, you know? Actually the
“Loudspeaker Riddim,” that was the track behind “First Time” and Popcaan’s
“The System,” that was recorded on an aeroplane. I mean, the original idea was
done on an aeroplane sitting at the tray table. I really think it’s a unique
thing that we are able to make music wherever we are, if we have a laptop, so
I try to take advantage of that rather than confine myself to something that
has to be in a studio context. DAVIDE BORTOT You mentioned Vybz Kartel before. I don’t know if all you guys are familiar
with him. He’s probably the most influential dancehall artist of the past five
to ten years. I would like to play a track, which is the other video. (music: Vybz Kartel - “Go Go Wine” / applause) DAVIDE BORTOT So you mentioned that you had recorded the first track over the Internet, but
then you ended up going to Jamaica and actually working with him in the
studio. And you ended up producing his whole album, which I think is quite an
uncommon thing in dancehall to do anyway, just produce an entire album. And
then, for you to not come from that scene and obviously only having worked
with him over the Internet, how exactly did that happen? Dre Skull As I said, it was a bit of a fortuitous, random thing, but based on the
strength of “Yuh Love” I had made plans to go down to Kingston to record a bit
more and so I got in the studio with Kartel. I think I brought three or four
tracks for him to record on. He works incredibly quickly. DAVIDE BORTOT How long does a song like this take to come together for him? Dre Skull I’ve never heard of anything this quick or worked with anyone, but even heard
of anything. The way it would usually work is, I show up with the music. I
don’t play him 20 beats and he picks three, I play him four beats and he
records on all four. Generally, he will sit down in a chair. The track is
already loaded up in ProTools and the lights go down, the mic is turned on.
He’s got no pen and paper and the first time he hears the song, the record
button is already pushed on the mic. So, he’s maybe for the first ten or
fifteen minutes he’s just listening back and he’s starting to, not mumble, but
just hum and make different guttural sorts of sounds and find cadences and
melody ideas. And I should say, he’ll tell the engineer, “Keep that little
bit,” or, “Keep that little bit,” even though it’s this non-verbal sort of
thing. That’ll be saved and muted and those are his guide reference points
when he feels like he found something quite good. Then within ten or fifteen
minutes he’s now recording words onto the track. Within an hour, maybe an hour
and half, the song is completely written, completely recorded. He’s recorded
his doubles, his ad libs. It’s unbelievable. I think it’s because he’s an
incredibly hard-working entertainer. I think he’s probably recording like
fifteen songs a week for years, if not for over a decade, so he’s definitely
done 3000 or 4000 songs or more. He’s really honed something and obviously has
deep talent. I think when I went down there that first time we did three or
four songs in one or two nights, and at the end of it he said, “I think we
made a mini-album.” I don’t think prior to that trip I would dream like, “Oh
yeah, I should produce a Vybz Kartel album.” That was kind of outside the
realm of what might be possible so I don’t even think I imagined that, but
when he said that - we had been getting along well and it felt like a good
creative connection - I was like, “Well, what do you think? Maybe we should do
an album.” And he was like, “We should definitely try to do that.” Then it
took about a year, but I would go down maybe four or five times over the
course of the next year and I would bring three or four songs every time. DAVIDE BORTOT So, it’s three days of tracking him down and then 30 minutes of recording? Dre Skull [laughs] Yeah, I definitely spent days in Kingston just waiting, where he
would be like, “Yeah, 8 PM tonight we’re good,” and then at eight he’s
like, “Ten, we’re good at ten.” “We’re good at midnight.” And then he never
shows up. So it was really a certain amount of patience and waiting but I knew
that was part of the deal so it wasn’t so bad. But once we got in the studio
it was just unbelievable. DAVIDE BORTOT So apart from the waiting, which I think everybody’s familiar with who’s ever
been to Jamaica before, can you tell us a bit more about how it’s like coming
there? I mean, the place is pretty special. Obviously, the role that music
plays in the country is incredible, probably unlike anywhere else in the
world, so maybe you can tell us a bit more. How is it like, touching down for
the first time? Dre Skull I guess, I didn’t completely know what to expect the first time. At this point
I’ve been lucky enough to go to many studios and meet a lot of different
people in the business, vocalists and producers and everything, and to go to a
lot of parties and see soundsystems and everything. To me, it’s unbelievable,
this island that has, I think, about three million people; just the number of
studios and successful artists per capita, particularly that have such an
international reach. I don’t know if there’s another place in the world that
has anything similar, so it is very special to be able to work with artists
that come from that culture, because music is such a deeply ingrained part.
There’s such a deep history there. DAVIDE BORTOT You mentioned that there’s a lot of successful artists there. At the same time
I think the industry is struggling. It’s pretty hard for artists to create a
substantial revenue, just because it’s a small island, and it’s hard to cross
over internationally. Obviously, people don’t buy records anymore and I think
reggae suffered probably more from that than any other genre. But you at the
same time are pretty successful at what you do and seem to be able to make a
living, so why do you think that is? Dre Skull Well, I’m not totally sure, but maybe I have a bit of a benefit from not
having been deeply involved in the dancehall business as it has been
historically structured. I mean, there’s different labels like VP and then in
the early 2000s a lot of US or international major labels were signing artists
like Elephant Man and Beenie Man and other artists to big international deals
that would give them a big push internationally. But unfortunately, like I was
saying, in the US dancehall has a pretty limited ability to reach major radio,
because for whatever reason New York, Hartford, Boston and maybe Atlanta and
Miami are the main radio markets, but a lot of the country is shut out, or
shuts out dancehall, so it does make it a bit harder. And maybe it becomes a
chicken and egg thing where A&Rs at majors are thinking, “We shouldn’t
invest in this because the radio potential is limited and therefore the sales
potential is limited.” At the same time, the radio people are probably seeing,
“Oh, the labels aren’t really pushing this, so we shouldn’t really go out on a
limb and try to see what this track can do.” In terms of what I’ve been doing
from the business side, I just think there is a huge demand and level of
appreciation of this music around the world. Given that the music industry as
it’s been known to exist is kind of crumbling, I think it’s a good time to be
a disruptor and try to find new ways, whether it’s new revenue streams or just
new ways to present the music to different people who might not be core-market
dancehall fans. DAVIDE BORTOT One of the problems, obviously that the scene is facing is some of the lyrical
content, just because it’s very specific to the culture, I guess. You coming
from a totally different culture, how did you find relating to some of the
things that an artist that Kartel talks about in his lyrics, like bleaching or
certain views on sexuality that are very far away from what I think the kind
of people that you would be dealing with here in New York? How did you find
dealing with this sort of conflict, or this sort of contrast? Dre Skull A couple of things: just generally as a producer who’s not usually writing
lyrics, it’s always interesting because when you collaborate with someone
you’re giving up a certain amount of control. Particularly if you make the
music and someone else is writing the lyrics, whether it’s a pop song or a
dancehall song or a rap song or anything else. Does everything that rapper
said on your beat speak to you directly or to your experience, or are you 100
percent behind every word that was said or every thought that was put out
there? It’s an interesting aspect of being a producer. But with respect to
Kartel, say, or working with dancehall artists, I feel pretty good about the
messages he’s sharing, say, on Kingston Story. It’s a wide range of songs, some of it’s
sufferation stuff, some of it’s definitely for the club and parties, “Go Go
Wine,” this kind of song for the dancers. Just to watch that music have a
life, I think I can feel good about it. There’s another track on the album
called “Half On A Baby.” It’s
amazing when you put that music into the world all sorts of things can happen
that you would never have anticipated. That song, for some strange reason,
really took hold in the Bronx and in New York, not even with the core
dancehall crowd but actually with more of a Latino crowd. There’s this dance
called the Bronx wine, which is huge with 15-year-old kids in the Bronx and in
Brooklyn and all around New York. DAVIDE BORTOT Can you show it to us? [laughter] Dre Skull No, sir, but go on YouTube and type in “Bronx wine.” That song, for example,
in terms of new revenue streams and working in this business - and again, we
didn’t plan for this - every day for the last year there’s ten to 20 people
uploading videos of themselves in front of their webcams doing the Bronx wine.
Even though we didn’t do a video for that song and even though we didn’t get
to fully push it as a single the way we would have liked, it just picked up by
these kids and we monetize all these videos. And that’s OK, but more
importantly, I think it’s been the best-selling Kartel song in the US for the
last five months, and that’s just through this very viral, organic
development. DAVIDE BORTOT So, how important is YouTube as a revenue source for you running a label? How
does Mixpak make money? Obviously, everyone knows nobody’s buying records any
more. There’s some digital sales but this can’t possibly be enough money to
make a living off of it. So, how important is something like YouTube and how
have you been engaging with this platform as an entrepreneur? Dre Skull It’s interesting and it kind of fell into our laps or definitely just exploded
without us planning to, “OK, let’s figure out how to monetize YouTube.” We
just kind of recognized, I mean, Kartel is such a big name and his total, all
Kartel videos on YouTube, it’s got to be well over 100 million views. We were
recognizing that people were posting the songs and reposting the videos, and
at a certain point we became content partners with YouTube. It’s been eye-opening because we do actually make pretty good money on sales, say with the
Kartel album, and that’s a continuing monthly revenue stream for us, which is
great, but then it’s just been amazing because when we invested money in that
project and put the album out, we didn’t have YouTube in mind, but actually we
make, let’s say, like thousands of dollars a month on Kartel-related YouTube
revenue. So, it is important and now that we’ve seen that it’s shifting some
of the business decisions we’re making in terms of saying, “OK, yeah, we can
afford to go to Kingston and shoot a music video.” Traditionally, a music
video is an expense that a label makes, it’s a marketing expense and you hope
to make it back in sales, but with what we’ve got going with YouTube now, it’s
actually not. Ideally, it is serving a marketing function but it’s actually a
product to be consumed, essentially, and so ideally it’s going to at least pay
for itself if not become a source of its own profit. DAVIDE BORTOT So, business aside, the fact that you put out a proper album, which is a
rarity in Jamaica with this type of music, from a creative perspective, how
did you approach making an album? You mentioned the first four records more or
less came about as an accident and weren’t planned to be for an album, but was
there any sort of concept to the record, any sort of overarching theme that
you tried to give to it? It was the first time for you, right, producing a
full-on album? Dre Skull Yeah, it was the first time. I wouldn’t say there was a complete, overarching
concept. Definitely, I recognized that the business side of the dancehall
business is very much around riddims and riddim releases and singles, so a lot
of times a big artist album is pretty much like a collection of their biggest
hits over the last two or three years, plus a couple of new songs. So, I
thought, “Why isn’t someone” - and it has happened, but generally speaking -
“Why hasn’t there been a focus on albums and maybe you could make a bigger
impact?” That was kind of the idea, because particularly with the internet,
collecting the singles from the last few years, it’s much more likely that a
lot more people have heard those songs, so if you buy that album you’re very
familiar with the music already. So, I just thought it might be an interesting
thing where we could really just surprise everyone. Kartel was still putting
out singles while we were making the record and so he was very much staying
relevant and pretty much staying on top of the dancehall industry, but like,
“Let’s show a greater body of work.” I really approached it as something like,
“How can we showcase Kartel’s talents in a very well put together” - or try to
do it well put together – “array of songs with an arc to it?” But it wasn’t a
total concept album in terms of, it’s all about this. I think if anything the
concept was, let’s do an album, which was almost conceptual in the dancehall
context. DAVIDE BORTOT You’re now working on Popcaan’s album as well, right? Dre Skull I am, yeah. The Kartel album was pretty much me on production throughout and
so for this one I’m taking more of an executive producer role. I am producing
a bunch of tracks on the record but Dubble Dutch, who’s a Mixpak artist, is
doing some really great work and has a bunch of songs on it and then we have a
number of Jamaican producers, Anju Blaxx and Jamie Young Vibes and then Adde
Instrumentals so it’s not completely the same sort of affair in terms of how
the album’s coming together, but I’m really excited. I think we’ve done 14 or
15 songs and I’m hoping it’ll be ready for the fall and that should be another
Mixpak record as well. DAVIDE BORTOT What was he like in studio, how was it working with him? Dre Skull It’s great. I first met him when I was making Kingston Story. He kind of
came up in Kartel’s crew and so he would come ‘round the studio sometimes and
so we had that connection. I think we’ve done three singles together since
then. Every artist is different, and like I mentioned with “The System,” he
really surprised me with that, with the content and direction he took that in,
and I’d the say the same goes for the album. I really think he writes amazing
pop songs, very much in a dancehall context but I feel like he has a lot of...
I mean, he already has, but I was going to say he has a lot of ability to
cross over. I think he has already landed in the Billboard Hot 100 charts,
which again is kind of hard for a dancehall artist to do in the US, so that
shows something. Also, I think another interesting thing is, a lot of the
biggest names in dancehall are a bit older and I kind of feel like that is
because there used to be more money in the dancehall business coming in from,
say, US labels and so there was more marketing dollars to build up those names.
Then, as that money has dried up, those people kind of keep the crowns that
they have, so to speak, and there’s really no room to build up new, younger
artists. He’s kind of a rare exception in my opinion. I think he’s maybe 23-
or 24-years-old and he’s one of the biggest names in the world in terms of
dancehall, so I think it’s really refreshing that there’s a new voice speaking
for a new generation. I think he has a lot of potential to push things further
in a cool way that hasn’t been done. DAVIDE BORTOT Through working with Kartel, I think you changed your sound a lot and maybe
opened up to a bit more of an international audience. A lot of the stuff he
does these days is in a way influenced by the work you guys did together. So,
you developed some sort of producer/artist relationship. When he went to jail
- for those of you who don’t know, he’s currently in jail on murder charges -
how did you react to that? It’s obviously a crazy situation. How did that feel
for you, not knowing exactly what was going on? Dre Skull When I first heard he was arrested, I didn’t hear the charges or anything, and
actually over the course of making our album he had been arrested and held
without charges. I wouldn’t say I’m an expert on the Jamaican justice system,
but that initial time they asked him to come in for questioning and then they
said, “We’re going to hold you for 24 hours.” Then they said, “We’re going to
hold you for a week.” Then it was two weeks and after two and a half weeks
they let him go, no charges. At least comparing that to the US justice system
that seemed a bit odd. When I first heard he was arrested again, we were about
seven or eight days away from shooting the “Half On A Baby” video, it was
going to be the second single for the album. So, I assumed he’s just been
picked up and he’ll be held for a little bit and released and it’s probably no
big deal. Once I heard there was murder charges, obviously, I was shocked.
Working with him, that’s the last thing I could possibly expect. I think that
pretty much goes for most people I know. I’d like to assume that he’s innocent
until proven guilty, and again with the Jamaican justice system, I think it’s
been about two and a half years, a little bit over that, that he’s been locked
up with no trial, no charges. So, one wonders or one hears that he offended
the wrong person and they’re just going to hold him, teach him a lesson and
not charge him, so I just want to presume that he was not actually involved in
any of that and hope for the best. DAVIDE BORTOT Have you been in touch with him since? Dre Skull Obviously, when someone’s locked up it’s a bit hard to be in touch. DAVIDE BORTOT Well, he still manages to release a couple of songs a week, even though some
of the material might be old. Dre Skull Allegedly, there’s been allegations that he’s recorded in prison but he has
refuted those. I have been able to talk with people close with him, so in that
way communicate on certain business stuff that we’re dealing with. He
basically has communicated that he’s keeping his head up and doing all right,
but yeah, not a lot of direct communciation. DAVIDE BORTOT A lot of your music, obviously, there’s a Jamaican influence. Some of your
early releases on Mixpak had a lot of remixes by European producers. You have
a Japanese band on your label. How much of New York is in your music? Is that
of any importance to you, or is it just a place where you happen to live and
happen to have a family, but don’t really care that much beyond that? Dre Skull I don’t know what a listener would say, but for me I love listening to - and
have been for years - Funkmaster Flex. It’s such a rare thing, at least in the
US, to have a radio DJ that has that much flexibility with what he plays. DAVIDE BORTOT Flexibility? Dre Skull There you go, yeah. So, you know, hip-hop obviously was born in New York and
still has a strong vibe. Also, New York has a really big Caribbean community,
Jamaican community and I think that’s definitely been influential. But I think
just the concrete, the architecture and the vibe itself in ways that I
probably don’t even understand. Definitely, one thing I’ve taken is that music
can sound different in different locations. I don’t know if I can describe it
that well, but definitely hearing certain songs in Kingston, it comes with a
feeling of what I’m experiencing, what I’m seeing, who I’m with, and the same
would go with New York and pretty much anywhere. So, being in New York and
making music, I’m sure that’s had a big impact. DAVIDE BORTOT You mentioned your hip-hop influence. You recently worked on an album by a
relatively well known rapper. Maybe we should play a record off of that. (music: Snoop Lion feat. Mavado & Popcaan - “Lighters Up Up” / applause) DAVIDE BORTOT So, what’s it like working with your childhood hero? Dre Skull Basically, Diplo brought
me in on this project and when I heard who it was... He initially said, “I
want to partner with you, bring you in on this project, but I can’t tell you
who it is.” [laughs] When he eventually told me who it was, that was kind of
amazing because definitely I grew up listening to Snoop. Definitely, the first
day we were in the studio, Snoop had his wife there and it was just playing
him tracks and watching him bang his head to something I made five days before
it was kind of a surreal experience. Then, obviously, we had to get to work
and it was just a pure pleasure working with him. DAVIDE BORTOT Did you make the music specifically for that, with the idea in mind that you
now had to produce a reggae album for Snoop Dogg, or was that stuff that you
had already done before and thought could work well on this album? Dre Skull I think pretty much every single thing I did for that album was done for this
album. I think Diplo basically brought me in and said, “Snoop is wanting to do
an album recorded in Jamaica that’s inspired by a wide range of Jamaican
music.” So, before I got to Jamaica I made probably 20 tracks with a lot of
different types of ideas. DAVIDE BORTOT Let me put it this way, there’s quite a few people who feel like he shouldn’t
be doing that and it’s not real reggae and it’s disrespectful to the culture,
where it comes from. Regardless of whether he did a good job on that album or
not as a vocalist, but he basically doesn’t have the right to adopt certain
symbols, images and play around with this sort of terminology and symbolism
that means quite a lot to a few people, even on a religious level. How do you
feel about that? Dre Skull I don’t know. Obviously, I can recognize that it could be complicated ground
to tread, but I felt like, obviously aside from just making the music I got to
spend a lot of time with Snoop and he really shared the story of why he wanted
to make this record and it felt like a very genuine impulse. Essentially, what
he shared, which he’s said many other times publicly, is he’s getting to a
certain point in his life where he really wants to add to his legacy with a
different kind of spirit and content in the music. I personally wouldn’t fault
him for wanting to make music inspired by Jamaican music and collaborating
with different artists in Jamaica, so I don’t know. I think the main thing is,
the way I would look at something like that whether it was his project or
someone else, is what kind of attitude is this person bringing to this? Are
they sincere in what they say they want to do? And he really felt like he was
on something like a spiritual journey, so I felt honoured to be part of that
process. DAVIDE BORTOT What was it like working with a producer like Diplo in the studio, who I think
a lot of times will take more of a curator role and put together people who he
believes would work amazingly well together in the studio? It’s a lot of times
not quite clear what he did on the beat, and then some beats he makes by
himself, so how exactly was the collaboration between you and him? Dre Skull Well, he’s got a great musical mind; great producer, probably one of the
hardest working people I’ve come across in this business. It’s pretty amazing,
he’s probably on tour 200 to 300 days a year and yet he really is making time
to go into the studio in any country or any city he’s in. But yeah, in the
studio over the course of the work we did here, some of the songs are 100% from his mind and his vision and other songs are collaborations
between all the producers and then some of these songs, there are more things
that I brought to the table but then he said, “Hey, what if we switch the beat
up like this?” Because he’s both a producer, he’s a label owner and just kind
of a cultural figure in a way, so he’s hitting different projects from
different angles. But it was definitely a great experience to get to see him
work and to collaborate with him and just to see his mind. I mean, I think
being a DJ can be a real asset to a producer, depending on the music you make,
but I think he has a real intuitive sense of what’s going to work. It might
be, “Hey, wait, we need to speed this track up ten bpm so we can play it in
this context in the club” - that sort of thing, where I think a lot of
producers might not have that relationship. He’s a great producer, so I don’t
know that he always gets enough credit for that. DAVIDE BORTOT How does it feel like if you put something out on Mixpak? You make a beat,
record vocals, work on the arrangement, mix it and put it out on your own
label, so you have full control. And a situation like this, where you work on
a major label record with other producers, other people might have different
opinions? How does it feel hearing your music, which is your music in a way,
but again, it’s also other people’s music and might not sound exactly like
your vision was like when you started out making that track? Dre Skull It’s an interesting aspect of the business dictating certain creative stuff.
Like you say, when I do something on Mixpak it’s pretty much something that I
have a great amount of control over. I mean, if I’m working with a vocalist I
don’t tell the vocalist what to say and that sort of thing. DAVIDE BORTOT But you could always not release it. Dre Skull That has happened. Sometimes with a vocalist we will have a conversation like,
“I think this song could be about this.” Whether it’s Kartel or Popcaan or
someone else, but a lot of times, probably the majority, I’m letting the
vocalist dictate that to me. I guess you have to ask yourself what you want
out of your own creative energy and output. I mean, if you are working in a
major label context there’s many different ways it goes down, but there’s
A&Rs who work for the label and a lot of times A&Rs, say, in the rap
world, are looking for beats. Then you have artist managers who might bring
the beat in. You might have a beat that in your mind was like a sketch of the
idea and it gets to the rapper and the next thing you know you hear it and
it’s released and you’re like, “But I was going to change the outro,” or
something like that or, “I would have flipped it a little different, or just
mixed it differently.” So, I guess you have to be aware of what kind of game
you’re playing and are you comfortable in that role, ceding some control? I
guess it’s on very much a case by case basis, and also you might not realise
that you have an issue with it until it’s too late, so it’s definitely a
learning thing. It’s a very personal thing that you have to learn your own
relationship with it. DAVIDE BORTOT Is that something that you see yourself doing in the future, doing the next
Rihanna album or something like that, or would you rather produce riddims and
record artists that you like? What’s the vision for moving forward? Dre Skull I definitely want to keep working with artists that I really admire, that I
personally have an affinity for and have an emotional response to, but that’s
not to say that I wouldn’t want to work with a Rihanna or someone like that.
I’m interested in working at the highest level, essentially, not financially,
but just as a producer who wants to work with vocalists and songwriters. It’s
a great opportunity to be able to work with the ‘best’ songwriters, quote-
unquote, or the ‘best’ singers with great voices, that sort of thing. I’m
essentially actively pursuing both, a lot of stuff, like I’m doing this
Popcaan record. At the same time we’re bringing in some pretty major rappers
to do guest verses on the Popcaan record, but we do have a lot of control over
that. And yet at the same time, yeah, I have a bunch of different things in
motion with major labels that I’m not going to assume will all work out well
but that I’m happy to be pursuing that as well. But, really, I think if I was
just in one side of that, only doing Mixpak stuff or only doing major label
stuff, I don’t think that would be enough for me and I think by doing all of
it, or different types of projects with different levels of control or input,
it serves my different areas of interests. DAVIDE BORTOT I think before we open this up to questions I’d love to play one more record. (music: Tifa – “Champion Bubbler” / applause) DAVIDE BORTOT So, do you have any questions? Audience Member Hey there, I don’t know if I can see you through this crowd of people, but
hey. I was just going to ask, when you’re getting into the room with a
vocalist, do you ever have occasions where maybe the vibe just isn’t there and
they’ll leave without recording something on top of the riddims you’ve made
for them? Dre Skull Let me think about that. In Jamaica I’m just about always working with the
artists. Sometimes in the US I’m working with a top-line songwriter and maybe
the track’s going to be for someone to be determined or something like that. I
think it’s pretty rare that we leave the room without something. Sometimes,
obviously there’s been times where it’s been hard to get the vibe. In a lot of
ways, obviously I have less work to do in that moment, because I’ve made the
track, so sometimes the vocalist or the songwriter rather is just having a
mental block of some kind, or just they don’t care for the track and are not
responding to it, so I guess there’s been a few times. I think I did a track
with Popcaan called “Get Gal Easy,” and we did a session where he did “The
System” and this other track “So We Do It” and “Get Gal Easy,” so we were
going to do all three of those in a day. When it got to time to do “Get Gal
Easy,” which did not have that title because it wasn’t written, but he said,
“Let’s slink back tomorrow.” But then I got a text in the middle of the night
being like, “By the way, I recorded that.” So, for whatever reason, I don’t
know if he was hungry or he was tired in the moment, he was like, “Let’s come
back to that, but in the end he recorded to it.” Audience Member Do you have a ritual to get the vocalists in the right mindset when you get
into the studio with them? Dre Skull Well, it really depends. I would say not really. I usually let the vocalist
carry forth with whatever ritual’s going to work for them. I mean, usually in
Jamaica I’ve been working out of the studio that the vocalist is most
comfortable with, so it’s kind of like their home studio. So, that’s part of
their own ritual. I just would say, actually, if you want advice, ask the
vocalist, “How do you want to do this?” Recently, I was working with this
vocalist, a New York-based vocalist, Wavy Spice, and it was a studio that you
could walk out and get up on a roof deck. So, we just put the instrumental on
her phone and she took it up onto the roof away from me and just took an hour
and a half, two hours to herself, looking at the New York skyline, and wrote
it. I think, really, just giving the vocalist or the writer the opportunity to
make themselves comfortable, and really respect whatever it is they need to do
to get comfortable to write a song that they can connect with. Audience Member Hi. I know you work with Lil Scrappy, you’ve produced a track for him and
released it on Mixpak. I was wondering if you could just speak a bit about
that. Dre Skull That track process-wise wasn’t super different from some of these tracks I’ve
done in Jamaica. I went down to Atlanta and linked with him at this studio
called S-Line, which is this well known rap studio down there. He was
interesting. He actually is a super nice, humble, dedicated artist and he
shared a pretty interesting story with me, that he came up in the game writing
down his lyrics, having a lyric notebook, and then he met DJ
Toomp who was working
with T.I. a lot. And Toomp, I guess, convinced him to stop writing his lyrics.
He did a process similar to Kartel, where it’s like a dance between the
engineer and the vocalist and so the writing is happening to the microphone
live and it might be just bar by bar or a few bars at a time. But he was
explaining to me that for him it made the performance and the writing more
real, in his words. So basically, I think what he meant by that is, if he’s
reading off pen and paper, there’s a part of his mind that’s focused on
reading while he’s trying to rap and by just literally coming from his mind it
can be a more direct kind of performance. The other thing I noticed about that
is, it can really become about the sounds and the enunciation and how you’re
pronouncing different things, because sometimes it’s the way you say something
that makes something so catchy. The drawl or however you do it, the timing,
that might be the most important thing for the song. So, that was cool to hear
his take on that and to see it happen. Audience Member They both come from the same camp, but what’s the difference between working
with Kartel and Popcaan? Dre Skull Obviously, everyone’s an individual in many different ways, but I think
without saying anything negative about Popcaan, because he’s a great
songwriter and a great vocalist, Kartel I just think has had so many years of
writing so many songs that his understanding of song structure and of how to
do certain things... I mean, I’ll tell a little story about Kartel. He blew my
mind in a number of different ways, but he would do something where he would
often, say, it’s a hook, he’ll record bar one then he’ll skip bar two and
write something for bar three. Then he’ll go back and write bar two and bar
four, and so it’s like this weird filling in this puzzle. My take on that is
that there’s something actually subtly catchy about what happens when you hear
the lyric. You would never listen back and think, “Oh, that sounds like it was
recorded out of order,” but there might be something almost subconsciously
that’s more catchy about the recorded quality of that. Then also, it has
implications for the songwriting in terms of what words he’s choosing and
stuff like that. I think the craziest thing he did once, there was a 12-bar
verse in a song and he recorded bar 12, then he recorded bar 11, bar 10 and
literally recorded the entire verse, wrote it and recorded it, backwards. I
was just like, “What the hell is going on?” Because I’d never heard of
anything like that. But upon reflection I’m thinking, “OK, he knows lyrically
where this verse is ending up, so he can build a path to that end and likewise
with the melody.” So, there’s kind of a genius in working that way. I don’t
know that many people could do it even if they wanted to try to do that. So, I
really would say just the difference with Kartel is probably he’s recorded, as
I said, 3000 or 4000 songs. Popcaan has done a lot less. But as important as
that might be, that kind of experience, someone who’s recorded two songs might
write the most amazing song that’s ever been written, so it’s not a
requirement that you’ve had that experience. But I’d say with Popcaan, I think
he takes maybe a more measured approach. I should have on the previous
question mentioned that with the “Get Gal Easy” song, Popcaan took the
instrumental and put it in his car and drove around Kingston all afternoon or
all night, I guess, I should say. I definitely never saw Kartel take
instrumentals and live with them, but occasionally Popcaan will do that.
Again, whatever works for the vocalist. I like listening to music in a car and
you definitely might catch a different inspiration from that context. Audience Member Just one other question about “Champion Bubbler” with Tifa. What’s the
difference between working with female artists in dancehall and male artists
in dancehall? Dre Skull I’m not sure I’ve seen something that would stand out as a difference. I mean,
her process, in my experience, she likes to get the instrumental maybe the night
before and spend some time with it. And then she’ll come in with something
more fleshed out, maybe not done, but maybe a hook or some ideas, a hook and
one verse. She’s a good friend and a great vocalist, but yeah, I don’t know if
I could really tease out the differences on that. Audience Member I think one of the most interesting things in your whole story is, you were
just doing music and then you saw a window, I guess, or something. Was this
like, rational? Did you, when “Yuh Love” happened and there was obviously a
different sound. I’ve never heard anything with a dancehall artist on top of
that sound like that before. There’s a room full of people and everyone’s from
a different country, from Argentina to whatever. I did my whole life like that
as well, I saw a window and I took it and I kind of think that’s how I got out
of Portugal or how I got into music and stuff like that. Was that a rational
thing, did you actually see it consciously? “OK, I made a different sound here
and I should push this button more often so I get more beats that sound like
this and do a little side road for dancehall or whatever and this is going to
be my signature thing.” Was that a [conscious decision]? Dre Skull I think at that point it was probably more random than a very conscious
decision. Actually, that first track for “Yuh Love,” I hadn’t met Kartel. I
had actually sent a different instrumental to him and I think I waited three
or four months and every week it was like, “Yeah, yeah, he’s going to be
recording it this week,” endlessly like that. So, I was wondering, is this
really going to happen, and then after three or four months I got an email
saying, “You know what? You got to send something different.” So, I had the
riddim for “Yuh Love” on my computer and I polished it a little bit, so in a
way it wasn’t intentional. Audience Member I mean, it’s more like after you actually saw the result of it, was it
something you wanted to grab and explore? Dre Skull I guess to a small degree, but maybe it was almost more unconscious.
Definitely, when I made that track I wasn’t thinking, “Oh, this is my take on
dancehall that’s going to be different than these specific ways.” There’s
certain differences maybe that people could tease out or talk about, but I
think it was just being true to where my head was at, at that time, in terms
of synth sounds or percussion or something like that. It wasn’t super
calculated, because I still don’t know what exactly I did or how I would
describe it. Audience Member Thanks. Audience Member OK, nobody’s asked this question yet so I guess I’ll just bite the bullet. The
Vybz Kartel prison break hoax, do you have any insight into the motive behind
that? Dre Skull I do not. It was kind of amazing. We were getting contacted by financial
magazines in India wanting information, so it really became this crazy global
story. I have no reason to suspect that it was Kartel who created that story,
but at the same time I really look at Kartel and the way he handled his career
in the last few years as a conceptual artist almost, approaching it in a
really extremely contemporary, interesting way, so I would say he was very
good at manipulating the media to have constant stories about him. Every week
there’s a huge scandal. It’s hard to really understand just how seriously
these scandals would take hold in Kingston and in Jamaica. I mean, it was
headline news every week. Kartel got braces and he would say in interviews,
“Yeah, I just got braces just to mess with y’all,” just because that would be
a weird thing to do. And so he was constantly creating these stories and
creating this larger myth about himself. So, I wouldn’t be that surprised if
he participated in that, but at the same time it may have just been a blogger
who realised they would get a lot of traffic if they made that story up. Audience Member These scandals, they don’t necessarily correlate with album releases or
anything, they’re just in order to keep his name in the public eye? Dre Skull Yeah, I never had a deep conversation on that with him, but definitely not
related to album releases. It might have just been a way he entertained
himself. Maybe he’s naturally eccentric in certain ways and realised people
are responding to this, so I’m going to share this more with the world. Thank you. DAVIDE BORTOT Any other questions? No one? Good, then I guess we just wrap this up. Give a
huge round of applause for Dre Skull.

---

Title: A-Trak & DJ Mehdi
Date: 2015-04-20
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/atrak-and-dj-mehdi-short-attention-span-people/

A-Trak & DJ Mehdi
In the second half of the 2000s, Canadian turntable wizard A-Trak and the late French DJ and producer Mehdi became one of the best known and loved DJing duo. Riding high on the popularity of electro and French touch, the pair took everything they’d learned in the trenches of hip-hop culture – from selecting to scratching, sampling to producing – and applied it to both records and club sets with an irresistible flair.
In this lecture at the 2007 Red Bull Music Academy, the duo explained how and why they broke away from the restrictions of hip-hop, how they adapted to the digital age and how to rock a party and still maintain integrity.
Hosted by Torsten Schmidt So yeah, OK, this is the more official bit. Please give a warm welcome, all the way from Paris, France, and all the way from Montreal via New York, A-Trak and DJ Mehdi. [applause] It’s a little bit like Gulliver’s set up in reverse isn’t it, like when you started out and won those championships it was you on some pedestal trying to reach for the turntables and now you have to lean down like that? A-Trak It’s cruel irony. Torsten Schmidt But it was you who set it up, it was none of us. A-Trak Exactly. It’s more intimate. The candles on my rider didn’t make it. Torsten Schmidt Oh, damn. We must have over read the bit about the candles. So what else do you have on your rider then? Torsten Schmidt Ah, what’s on the rider? Hummus, nuts, cashews, preferably. Sometimes promoters get cheap and they give you the nut variety pack but all you want is the cashews. Torsten Schmidt Cashews or macadamia, anything else isn’t on. Is that what you learnt when you were on tour with Kanye then? A-Trak He has cashews. Anything less is just not a legume. This whole lecture is going to be about nuts. Yeah, nuts. Torsten Schmidt So what else can you tell us about Kanye’s nuts then? [Laughter] A-Trak How you doing Mehdi? DJ Mehdi I’m doing fine. I don’t know that much about Kanye’s nuts, I’m sorry. A-Trak So. This is an improvised lecture as you can tell already but I swear we are going to get into the rhythm of things. Torsten Schmidt How do you go from improvising into rhythm anyway because, I mean, you guys usually plan things out in what you call a routine? A-Trak Yes and no, but lately, the last few years with the schedule being way more booked up, I always think I’m going to plan stuff and I end up improvising a lot more. So Mehdi and I are doing this tour together right now. We’re doing a set together during the Fool’s Gold tour and then next week we’re going to Europe, just me and him, and then we have this whole thing mapped out that we’re going to rehearse for three solid days and come up with a whole prepared set but we’ve been improvising everything. Torsten Schmidt So what is Fool’s Gold outside of nine minutes 53 seconds of brilliant Stone Roses madness? A-Trak Is that really how long it is? Did you do your research before this interview? Torsten Schmidt Funnily enough, I think there it’s 9:53, but if I’m not totally mistaken, the song is 10:47 or something? A-Trak Torsten, you are crazy. Torsten Schmidt I never really understood that I thought it was some weird numerological conspiracy behind it, I thought you might clean it up? A-Trak Well, this is 9:56 but if it’s recorded off a 12”, maybe they played an extra three seconds after. Torsten Schmidt So the hiss might be it, in the end? A-Trak Yeah. Torsten, you scare me. Torsten Schmidt I’m sorry. I thought you got over that… A-Trak That one time I went to see you in Germany. Torsten Schmidt Now you’re scaring me. A-Trak Fool’s Gold is a label that my friend Nick [Catchdubs] and I started at the beginning of the year. I was running another label before that called Audio Research, which was ten years old when we stopped it this year. Audio Research was much more of an indie hip-hop label from the Fat Beats, Rawkus era, which we kept going, but in the last few years I got more into merging electronic music with the rap stuff that I was producing. Basically, there was a new wave of artists and songs that I wanted to champion and put out. Whether stuff that I was producing or people that were in the same scene as me that I felt Nick and I could really bring together and package with some good art work and get behind. That’s how the label started. Torsten Schmidt Are you trying to say you got bored with backpack [hip-hop]? A-Trak Didn’t we all? In a sense, I mean, it was basically a crossroads, a situation where it was like: “OK, do we try to keep Audio Research going and give it a new image or do we just start fresh with a new brand?” And I think we all really agreed that a new brand made sense. And we’re on this tour right now, the Road Rampage, running through a select run of cities. It’s going really good. Torsten Schmidt I mean for a Road Rampage you both look pretty composed. A-Trak I got a big scar all across here from last night when Mehdi hit me with a vodka bottle. DJ Mehdi We chose not to speak about this. A-Trak Yeah, forget what you just heard. There’s no scar. Torsten Schmidt What people probably don’t really know is that you, before you met Pedro Winter, were already quite an illuminate figure in the Parisian scene as well, right? DJ Mehdi Yeah, I have kind of the same way in the… I won’t say career because we’re pretty young me and Alain, despite our looks. A-Trak Our boyish good looks. Torsten Schmidt It’s all about good products when being on tour, right? Dj Mehdi Nuts. Cashews. Torsten Schmidt Good cream, good cream, yeah. DJ Mehdi Yeah, try the energy mix. A-Trak Kiehl's. DJ Mehdi And, yeah, being a hip-hop producer for quite a long time and the idea of merging electronic music and hip-hop was already there and we in Paris – who you refer to as Pedro Winter who’s also known as Busy P, the label manager for Ed Banger Records – were doing since ’97, ’98 on a very underground scale… small clubs in Paris, very small clubs like 300-, like 400-people clubs. But a lot of things made the opportunity for us to be on a larger scale also: a wider range of artists, a lot of artists who were kind of doing the same thing in small parts of the world but you could add them up. And also, I think, and maybe you won’t agree me, but I think the Neptunes, Timbaland, some of those guys were already, maybe even without knowing it, not doing it but they were merging electronic music and hip-hop in their ways and that also paved the way, basically. Torsten Schmidt Thank god for sampling laws, then. A-Trak Yeah. I mean, yeah, Mehdi definitely I think... Mehdi and I only met less than a year ago, but I knew about him for years, and actually he met... my brother and I have worked very closely and he met my brother when we were all working with Fat Beats and he was also doing stuff with Fat Beats. People that know him for his current music might not know that he was one of the most proficient or prolific hip-hop producers in France in the ’90s, so definitely when we met this year I think we saw eye to eye having done that same trajectory of going from a true-school hip-hop background in the ’90s to getting into DJing and party rocking and electro mixed with rap in today’s musical climate. Torsten Schmidt How many times do you have to read on whatever backpack sniper forum that you “sold out”? A-Trak I don’t really get much flak from the hip-hop guys. Actually, the only times I get a hard time from fans or from anyone is when, that happened just two nights ago, someone at the show was just like, “Turntablism!!!!” in the middle of a straight electro set and it’s like, I’ve been scratching over these songs and the way I’m mixing this stuff, we’re trying to get creative with it. Doesn’t have to literally be a DMC-style routine to be interesting DJing. But I think, on the hip-hop side, there’s not that many people I think, today, that are really, really holding onto… Torsten Schmidt Their nuts? A-Trak No, who are holding onto this sacred vision of what hip-hop is supposed to sound like as much as it was a few years ago. I agree with, Mehdi named Timbaland and the Neptunes, I think for a lot of us around 2001 or once the Neptunes got past using the exact same sounds in every track and made a few really, really interesting songs, and did the N.E.R.D. album and all of that… that to me really made the whole distinction between underground and mainstream in rap irrelevant. To me, anyone that still talks about mainstream and underground, except for really extreme examples, except for really extreme cases, is kind of stuck in an old dichotomy of rap and of music because there definitely was a point to me around the early 2000s where major-label rap records came back to being the best rap records. When The Blueprint came out there was nothing indie that was comparable, and the indie stuff became… Torsten Schmidt Which interestingly enough was the first time that Jay-Z did a true album as such, as one consistent theme as well. A-Trak Yeah, as opposed to a singles-based record. Torsten Schmidt Collection. A-Trak Absolutely. As that was going on, the indie world that we all bubbled in in the mid- to late ’90s and that we all loved and cherished became a caricature of itself. Torsten Schmidt Obviously, the commercial realities somehow have fused the two worlds together anyway, because overall the numbers have gone down, so the difference between 500 and 20,000 sales, is not that gigantic anymore. A-Trak Yeah, it’s just not the same reality. It works both ways. Certain indie artists are way more sustainable than the artists that are signed to majors. It used to be like, either you stay indie and you sell small numbers but you make music that you feel strongly about, or you go on the major and you make shit that’s only for 14-year-old girls. For a second, it really was that simple but now, all the styles are merging anyways. Rihanna’s making dance records and records that sound like what Madonna was doing a few years ago and she’s an urban artist. Torsten Schmidt One nation under one all-over print hoodie then? A-Trak Yeah, exactly, yeah. At the same time, Kylie is reaching out to guys like Benny Blanco who’s like too young to get into a club and produces Spank Rock records for beats, so across the board everything is merging like that. Torsten Schmidt You can pretty much consider yourself as a veteran in this game then, already. A-Trak I’m an old fart. Torsten Schmidt Yeah, old fart at? A-Trak 25. Torsten Schmidt Oh, it’s a quarter of a century. Like football players. A-Trak No, but the industry is. I’ve been doing this for 12 years. Torsten Schmidt And just for a point of reference how old are you? DJ Mehdi I’m 30 years old. Torsten Schmidt Did you, you know, ask for your state pension yet? DJ Mehdi A what? I released my first record in ‘92, 1992, so it’s been 18 years. I think we spent more time in the industry than out of it, which is… Torsten Schmidt Which is a bit of a weird feeling when you realize that you’ve been going to clubs and all that for longer than you’ve not been, right? DJ Mehdi But you know what? My wife, for example, who doesn’t really understand this whole thing, always asks like, it’s been three weeks and I’m in the States and I’ve been playing every night, sometimes twice, sometimes three times when there’s an after party or something and she’s like: “How do you still get excited?” Except the fact that it’s Chicago and last night was Vancouver it is pretty much going to be the same and you’re pretty much going to be spinning the same records and I cannot really explain, but I do get excited and I do want to do it and I’m always happy and I’m not bored, so I feel good. Torsten Schmidt I hope you’re not using her as a reference point because you want to be excited with her for the next 40 years as well, right? A-Trak I wish I’d plugged in my effects thing to put an airhorn every time Torsten does the dry humor [laughter]. I actually have at home those old-school bicycle horns, I should have brought that, too, the Mr Magoo horn. Torsten Schmidt The one you put on a bike with the little pump kind of thing? Yeah, they’re good. A-Trak I bought them at a shop in Japan at five in the morning. Torsten Schmidt You can take them off as well and you can use it as a foghorn like one of those hunting things? A-Trak In the alps that’s what you do. Torsten Schmidt I guess so. It’s one of those things, who said it the other day, there’s a siren plug-in for Serato now. You must have about 800 million sirens in your collection somewhere. A-Trak I have a lot of sirens. DJ Mehdi He’s the siren master. A-Trak I have a siren playlist. I don’t. It just sounded funny. Torsten Schmidt With this whole thing of the styles merging and “yadda, yadda, yadda,” discuss the A-Ha routine. A-Trak The what? With Kanye? He doesn’t do that anymore, but when we were doing the Touch The Sky tour when Late Registration came out, there was a part of the show when Kanye wanted to play other people’s hits to get the crowd riled up. When we started doing it, and we had the full set for the tour, we actually had a clock radio and he was like: “Hey, let me see what’s on the radio,” and then you play a Prince song and the crowd is like: “Oh my god, I love Prince! Michael Jackson is so good, you like him? I like him too.” Then he always caught people off-guard when the last song was A-Ha “Take On Me” and he’d do the Carlton dance and a lot of people thought it was… The crowds would cheer and then certain people would get: “Why’s he playing “Take On Me”? I think everybody likes that song but… DJ Mehdi Not everyone. A-Trak You don’t like it? Ah. Yeah, but… Torsten Schmidt When I went to first year in grammar school… I had a moment there. A-Trak I think in certain respects what Kanye does with music, and it translates with his shows even more, is kind of like a musical education side of it, where he embraces the idea that his music is for everyone. And when he goes and gets artwork by Murakami or a video with Gondry that doesn’t even come out, or I don’t know, to get this or that person to play on his records, part of it is, I think, his side of wanting to strive for what’s best. And part of it is also embracing the idea of being a pop artist and an artist that makes popular art for everyone to appreciate, and bringing that to the masses. Torsten Schmidt He’s an easy one to hate on if you want to, but nevertheless, when you go to a concert and that tour, which started with the “Touch The Sky” video and all those installations of all the whorehouses of the world and poor little Kanye lost in sin and temptation. You just got in there and it was like, “Whatever is usually happening, for the next two hours this is Las Vegas and you’re going to be entertained and I’m your Frank Sinatra tonight. That’s a notion…” A-Trak At the end of the day, I really feel right now in music, what excites me is as the industry is more and more in shambles, the quality of music is more and more of a driving force. Sure, there’s still some extremely formulaic songs on the radio and what have you. But it’s just… for the simple fact that even if you’re an indie artist and you can put something up on iTunes and you can have placement right next to a major artist, the side of the industry that’s becoming more democratic because the big companies don’t know what to do any more. That makes a climate where good music can prevail a lot of times and I think that’s what’s fun with music right now. Mehdi was talking about how do you not get bored by playing similar sets every night in clubs that look the same and crowds that crowdsurf the same and pictures that go up on the site that look like Cobrasnake’s and everything being very similar every night, but I know that for me, there’s something about music right now that’s giving me a spark that I haven’t had in a while. Part of that comes from the fact that... I feel like music is stagnant and exciting at the same time. It got so stagnant in the past year, there’s so many DJs that are playing exactly the same selections, and as much as I like using Serato, Serato made it so easy for everyone to have a set that has a little bit of electro a little bit of Baltimore club, a little bit of, you know, all these… You have the obvious selection from each genre and mix it all together in no particular order and get it from the same blogs and you have so much of a situation where the mass of DJs were playing the same stuff that for me, suddenly now, this tour is the ultimate example of that, and working with Mehdi is exciting, too, for me it pushes me to figure out a way to stand out from that mass again. It’s not, from a DJs perspective, simply a question of: “Hey, I’m going to play this genre of music because I’m discovering it.” At this point everybody’s discovered it so it’s like: “How can I play it in a way that’s distinctly me?” And that’s a really dope challenge, and to find a balance between that challenge and just putting on a good party at the same time, that’s what I’m really enjoying right now, because you can get lost in that too and get super crazy and technical and it would be distinctly you, but the crowd would be like, “What?” So, to be a good entertainer and to develop your identity in the climate where everyone has access to everything, that’s one of the most exciting things about music right now for me. Torsten Schmidt Culturally speaking, that’s a pretty interesting paradigm shift because on the one hand you have this whole minority, this mainstream of... All these minority subgenres become the new mainstream and everyone is just putting the three distinctive tracks of each genre. Then in the same way as in the discotheques we hated when we first started going out, it’s like the similar system of the lowest common denominator kind of things because it’s always looking for the big-bang effect and pretty much for novelty kind of stuff. A-Trak Yeah. I don’t know, it’s fun. Just seeing rap and electronic merge together... when you’re a DJ and you come up and you learn about what DJing was like before you and you read about the music scene in the early ’80s and where the art scene and the whole kind of Soulsonic Force-style of rap that’s electro at the same time... that whole world where it’s like the artwork was crazy and then this artist used to hang out with that artist and they made that crazy punk record but then the next record was rap, shit like that. It’s starting to feel like that again. That’s what’s kind of encouraging, I think. Torsten Schmidt Within all these types of music, what do you actually like? In other words, do you like stuff? A-Trak You like stuff? I think I listen to... I try to pick and choose in almost every genre, but what I listen to the most is still rap and electro, and then a certain selection of classics that I love. Everybody has their personal couple of albums of ’70s shit that they just really like and ’80s shit that they just really like, and that’s pretty much what you’ll find me listening to in my down time. Torsten Schmidt What is the difference between some old Dead Head following Jerry Garcia for 5,000 miles and us praying every morning to the holy Street Sounds compilation? A-Trak Huh, what? Torsten Schmidt I mean when you had those rock dudes that really got on our nerves when we were growing up, who were just like, “Oh, the Dead, Led Zeppelin…” A-Trak I still love Zeppelin, yeah. Torsten Schmidt At the same hand you get the feeling that, I don’t know, certain Hashim “Al-Naafiysh” records or some Street Sounds compilation or whatever have similar status and we’re just getting to... we’re just exchanging Jimmy Plant for someone else, but it’s exactly the same boring mechanism. A-Trak Yeah, but then you mix… that’s getting mixed with updated sounds, and I think it’s that lineage that’s interesting. To be able to listen to a Newcleus record and like a SebastiAn record and be like, “That came from this, but this is also interesting because it adds a certain grittiness.” Torsten Schmidt The last album you did was one of the ones where even the most notorious naysayers were like, “You can do something with those influences and still make it sound now.” DJ Mehdi That’s the challenge. That’s the challenge for me, which is interesting because I’m not a singer and I’m not a rapper. So, I have to find a way to make interesting music instrumental and hip-hop at the same time. Like, when, after DJ Shadow and stuff and Krush and all those records, hip-hop instrumental records weren’t dance music records, so that’s an idea I was looking at but I’ve just started. It wasn’t my first album, it was my first album with this in mind and it was also the first album for our label Ed Banger Records, so a lot of things, we were just trying to do stuff and we were still excited about doing anything, but we weren’t ready to have an established thing, you know? It was more playing and finding new ideas and that’s why I still feel like we’ve just started, that’s why I’m touring a lot, that’s why I’m explaining a lot. I never say no to an interview just to explain that this is something we haven’t started but I am starting it for myself and I am still studying how to make instrumental hip-hop music that is more danceable and enjoyable. An album you could actually listen to without having to have chorus, verse, chorus, verse, OR radio singles and I think it also goes –something we haven’t mentioned – with the fact that you don’t have to pay for music any more, and the fact that when you do an album and you do these 13 or 14 tracks, you spend a lot of time getting them in the right order, thinking that anybody is going to listen to it in that order when everyone is going to shuffle his iPod or just browse into iTunes and pick the three tracks that they know. People just download and you’ve been thinking about this interlude between two songs that will be just the right link between song #7 and song #9 and you go to Limewire or Soulseek you don’t get the interlude so it fucks up your whole plan. It’s just… who knows, how do you listen to an album, which track, whatever, singles, stuff like that? We’re still experimenting with all this stuff and in that regard I had a lot of fun doing this record. I also needed a single or whatever, but it’s the first time in this industry that I actually did anything that I wanted to because I had no rules. Having no commercial pressure, having no major-label pressure and Ed Banger Records being still burgeoning and still very, very young at the time, I mastered my album almost two years ago, we were just having fun basically and that’s what I love. And I will speak only for Ed Banger Records but inside our own label which is growing up, I’m still fighting for this spirit to prevail and not videos, singles and big hits and stuff. And Pedro, Busy P and So Me, the guy who does all the art work, we are very much on the same page for this. It’s something that we really want to keep alive, doing 12”s, although nobody really buys 12”s anymore. Just doing fun things just because it’s fun and because it’s stylish, and because we like to without any economic plan that is very tight. We lose a lot of money. A-Trak But it’s for the sake of building a brand at the same time. And I think Mehdi was talking about the challenge and the difficulties of making instrumental songs when you come from a hip-hop background. When we first met, I remember having a long conversation with him about that because I faced the exact same challenges when I started producing more in the past few years. When you come from a hip-hop background, when you make a track, all you really make is a loop and someone helps you turn it into a song and then you might make a few change-ups once they put their vocals on it to spruce it up a bit. But most of us who are making the kind of music that we make don’t really have musical training, and we have to teach ourselves about song structure. But when you’re at a point in music like it is today, where all these genres are merging and what have you, there’s not even any rules for that, so it’s fun. You can make your own rules, but it’s challenging because there’s not even that many obvious examples to turn to sometimes to figure out how to make this demo into a song. And then for the next song to be a different approach and not to fall into formulas. But when it works, that’s what can make some of these records really unique. So, I can really relate to what he was just saying. Listening to guys like Shadow a few years ago, but at the same time watching that style of instrumental, sample-based hip-hop turn into practically hotel music when it got watered down and replicated so many times. DJ Mehdi But Shadow was the exception. A-Trak Yeah, Shadow is the only one. DJ Mehdi Not the only one, but he was… A-Trak … the best one. No, of course, I’m not saying his music is hotel music but every time that someone else tried to make… when I started working on an album for myself about two years ago, maybe almost three, I don’t even know, for me it was interesting because I had all these different ideas and concepts that I wanted to infuse into my music, and on one hand I wanted to make scratch music that was enjoyable as music. I come from a background of turntablism, as you probably know, and there has been some, what I would call scratch music, meaning like tracks that are mainly executed by manipulating records as opposed to putting a sound in a drum machine or whatever. But a lot of times over the years the records that were made like that stayed extremely leftfield and extremely… I think people will almost let the producer get away with a song being just not that catchy because it’s interesting technically. But I wanted to make songs that were good songs but that have that technical element because I happen to like the textures that that would bring to production. If I scratch the hi-hat, and there’s a low frequency that comes from my record and the needle picks up on that, and there’s a little bit of static on the high end, that makes a really rich sound. And when every layer of your track is like that I really like the richness of that. So, on one hand I wanted to have that element in my production. On the other hand, if you look at it like two, three years ago, I wanted to work with a few rappers that I liked without sticking to whatever those old paradigms we were taking about in terms of who you would expect me to work with. That’s why the first song I put out was with Dipset, just to make a statement, to be like: “You might think I’m A-Trak, the scratch DJ who has a label with Fat Beats, and because of that you might expect me to only work with someone trying to sound like Tribe many, many years later – but I happen to love Dipset and here’s a song with Dipset.” So, there was that element to it and then I also wanted to have an element that works very close to what Mehdi was describing, in terms of making danceable uptempo instrumentals. And what I ended up with was a bunch of songs that didn’t really gel together, and I kind of put the whole project aside. And the party side of it, of the production that I was starting to work on a few years ago, is what I really stuck to, and now when I make a track I don’t need to have a scratch in it, just because I didn’t really need to have it any more. I don’t have that side of me that’s just like: “There has to be a scratch because that’s not how I’m trying to present myself.” The hip-hop stuff that I did that was really pure hip-hop. Like the song I did with Little Brother, for example, that to me is like a previous chapter. But the party stuff, that’s what’s really interesting to me right now, because there’s a ton of ways to get really creative with it. Torsten Schmidt So Mehdi, when you said no-one is really listening to albums in order any more, don’t you think you were on the receiving end of this as well, since you put in an effort and created some sort of a classical album approach with interludes and so forth and actual, like: “OK, I don’t care if you download three of them, I’m going to do this the way I want it to be”… DJ Mehdi Well, that’s an approach I have about life and about art every day. The way you present yourself to ten people or ten million people should be the same. If you are devoted to your art or if you believe, that’s why I love to do in-stores and stuff like that, and I also love to play big-stage festivals in front of 10 or 15,000 people and just show the same energy because it keeps me rooted where my love for music and not necessarily my ambition, if you will. I’d like to just add one point to what we were saying just before, the difficulty for us producers to have our own music. And two points, we’ve talked about the hip-hop producers that were using electronic music and stuff. There was also an influence from the electronic music field, where producers such as the Chemical Brothers, as Fatboy Slim as Daft Punk were becoming artists of their own and interpreting and performing their own songs… A-Trak … and made pop records… DJ Mehdi … and made pop records. Because without even having to have “featurings” first. And second, I thought at one point that our best producers in the hip-hop field, namely Kanye, for example, or Pharrell or Timbaland, or all those guys, even if you say Dr Dre, they had to become rappers to become pop stars. I’ve never had this in me. I never was in the position where I was like, “Oh, OK, maybe I should sing or start to write rhymes so I can have my own records.” So I had to find another path, but I thought the electronic music guys, especially Daft Punk – because I am from Paris and they are my friends – they were very, very, everywhere in Paris when they blew up. And it was very hard, even if you were deeply rooted in the backpack underground hip-hop scene, which can be the most closed circuit that you can ever do, they were everywhere. They were just so influential, being producers they were using the same records, they were using the same tools, they were using the same samplers, but they were artists of their own. They had power in their approach that we didn’t have. For me, I wasn’t going to become a rapper or a singer or whatever like Pharell or whatever, but I was just like: “Hey, there’s something here.” And Fatboy Slim also and the Chemical Brothers… A-Trak I always thought that Daft Punk had a hip-hop or close to hip-hop production, anyways. Especially, after I discovered some of the samples that they used. Some electronic music is studio wizardry, but Daft Punk’s production a lot of times is just very loop-driven and when you would just hear [the sample from “Harder, Better…”]... Torsten Schmidt …which is? A-Trak Err, what’s his name… Yeah, that’s it, Edwin Birdsong and you’re like: “Wow, it’s all here except the vocoder.” When you come up in hip-hop and you learn about production in the hip-hop aesthetic, which is extremely minimal and stripped down, you look at dance music as kind of a mystery and I still do. Even if everything I’ve produced this year is in the 120 to 130 bpm range and is meant to be played next to an electro song in a club set, I’ll still listen to electro and dance records and there will always be one thing in a track that I hear and I’m like, “I don’t know how to do this.” Daft Punk was one of those groups where you could relate to it as a hip-hop head, because you’d be like, “Oh yeah, they’re just looping stuff and doing it so well that it becomes a pop song.” Their approach of it is very sample-based. Torsten Schmidt Speaking of Daft Punk, and obviously with you representing Ed Banger to a certain degree, you got a common link in the person running it. But ideologically, the Justice approach on stage for example is slightly different than the classic Daft Punk approach, isn’t it? DJ Mehdi Yeah. I wouldn’t speak for Justice, as I won’t speak for Daft Punk either. I know that Daft Punk pretty much… Pedro Busy P said this in many interviews so I can say it: in a way, Daft Punk started Ed Banger. Not only the label, because Pedro did it or whatever, but just the spirit and the powerful French artists to come, for example here. If you know in American or in Canada, or even in England. England and France are like 20 kilometers one from the other but for us French artists to go and play in London, it’s not that often. Definitely, Daft Punk in many ways were the blueprint of what Pedro tried to do with Ed Banger after this. We are another generation, I’m almost the same age as Thomas but the Justice guys, for example, they are a bit younger and they grew up without any boundaries. There are no borders any more. For example, I know for sure that Xavier from Justice used to listen to a Busta Rhymes record or to French hip-hop records like NTM or Lunatic and Daft Punk, not without having to say, “This is what I like. I’m into house music and I don’t...” When my generation for example, if you were into Nirvana for example, you are into Tupac or Notorious BIG. That was our push. Growing up, I had another approach, me personally, and Justice are a bit younger so I guess they also have their own approach. But as far as the... How did you call it? The link? Torsten Schmidt The presentation? DJ Mehdi The link between Daft Punk and us? Torsten Schmidt On the one side, you have the people that want to totally stand back and don’t put their own human personality in it and their private life, and the others go representing themselves as iconic rock stars, almost. DJ Mehdi Oh, that’s what you meant. Once again, I couldn’t speak for Xavier and Gaspar from Justice, but as far as I’m concerned, I was a producer first, like you said at the beginning, and I’ve been used to be in the shadow for ten years. A-Trak Now you stand on speakers. DJ Mehdi Now I’m standing on speakers, but I never envisioned my act as a group, as a band, as an iconic thing, if you will. Whether younger guys, like Kavinsky, for example, or SebastiAn in lesser, but Justice is the best example. They actually think about their image and their band as much as they think about their music. I couldn’t speak for them, me I’m a little bit different and I’m a DJ first. A-Trak There’s something that happened in dance music in the last few years also in terms of audience. Me being very close to my brother, who was in the group Chromeo, I really saw… Torsten Schmidt He’s your older brother as well. A-Trak Yeah, older brother. I really saw a whole progression in what they had to do as a band to kind of connect to their audience. When Chromeo did their first album, my brother was already doing his PhD, he didn’t want to tour. He liked to make music so he made the record and he was used to always being in the background, so he didn’t grasp the concept that he had to tour in today’s musical reality in order to support and album. When Chromeo was doing their first record, like four years ago, there was barely any references and influences in music at that time for what they were trying to do because the only stuff I remember… The only stuff they were listening to that was kind of contemporary was Daft Punk and Mr Oizo and maybe one or two other people and then it was all like the ’80s Cameo-style references to their music. When their label would tell them, “You have to tour to support this album or we’re freezing the budget” they’d be like, “But Daft Punk doesn’t tour.” Now they do, but you guys got to remember, everybody’s talking about Daft Punk’s show right now and they’re like the most talked-about performance, but they hadn’t toured in ten years, right? When Discovery came out, Daft Punk’s second album came out, you didn’t see them anywhere. For Chromeo, when they did that first record, it was really, it was a tough time in music because there was no bins in the stores to put their record in. My grandmother would go to the record shop to try and support “little David’s album,” like her grandson’s album, and she didn’t know where to find it. “Do you have Chromeo?” And they would take her to the techno section which is way in the corner, and Chromeo’s like way more, you know, Hall & Oates and funk and ’80s funk than techno. DJ Mehdi I don’t really agree to this point. A-Trak No, no, but a few years ago. DJ Mehdi And I didn’t agree with Dave on his first album. A-Trak Yeah, but that’s what they were faced with. They didn’t want to tour and the industry didn’t know where to but their record and that in itself was so much more of a challenge. When you make an album, you don’t think about that side of it and then they started touring in these clubs and these venues with indie groups. Once again, today this might make sense to you, but three, four years ago, it was really odd. I remember they were touring with The Unicorns in Canada and to me and him, it was just, we couldn’t wrap our heads around it. It was like, “Why are these kids coming to see Chromeo and The Unicorns at the same time?” But that was kind of like the beginning of this whole merging that we’re in the middle of now, where today, you have indie kids that know R.Kelly albums by heart and that think that Lil’ Wayne is the best rapper alive when, like, Lil’ Wayne’s shit is super lyrical, like, Lil’ Wayne’s rapping to me... I’m still wrapping my head around why an indie kid will listen to Lil’ Wayne, but that’s very much a reality today. Where you have people listening to dance, indie and crunk at the same time. Torsten Schmidt To continue with the real talk, the whole image… I mean you said you were happy staying in the shadows but I guess you were somehow happy with having an album with you drawn as Godzilla, right? DJ Mehdi Yeah because I had another ambition. And also because the music I was making without even thinking about it, the music I was naturally drawn to and making with my hands and my ears, like, weren’t that much appealing to the rappers I was working with anymore. And that pretty much happened to every producer I know. It’s true. At one point, how many beats can you make that go at 96bpm? Like for 10 years? At one point you’re like… If you were learning how to play the guitar. With the guitar with the six strings, you can play Django Reinhardt, you can also play Jimi Hendrix. You can go… there’s no selling out in finding some quality to some guitar player in one genre, like from Wes Montgomery to Jimmy Page. You know, I think it’s natural, I think it was natural for me, but say for example, let’s get out of the hip-hop or electronic music field. If you take a picture of Bob Marley for example in ’73 and one picture in 1980, before he died, and you got pretty much the same guy. He stayed true to what he was doing. The albums, the records he was making, the songs he was singing, were all, more or less, there’s only like 10 or 15 subjects he touched and he kept on making songs about this and we all loved it. A-Trak Lord have mercy. DJ Mehdi The Sex Pistols, for example, they could make the same song over and over and over and we would always like it because they were staying true and in another art form, in graffiti for example, or in skateboarding, or all the youth movements, there is this tendency of staying true to what you were drawn to at first, and being a bit punk about it. But there’s also, if you take a picture of John Lennon in 1963, like the same time period, ’63 to ’70, John Lennon had like 15 different phases and he was going through different stuff and what he was experiencing in life was showing in his music. It’s another way of seeing how you could evolve with your art, with your music, and the same goes for graffiti, and the same goes for, for example, I was picking about The Sex Pistols, like The Clash for an example, were doing another way of thinking with their own music and it was still punk. They were doing a hip-hop record with Futura and they were making “Rock the Casbah” and it was still interesting. And you couldn’t say Johnny Rotten was a better artist than Joe Strummer, it was just different. They had their own... so whatever. At one point, I was like how many James Brown or Parliament records can I sample again? Everybody’s doing the same thing, and we’re all going from like 92 to 98bpm and how many... Five, six, seven years you do this, and at one point you’re like, “Hey, this guy from San Francisco, DJ Shadow, was doing something different and these guys from across my street, named Daft Punk, were doing something very, very different with the same tools…” At one point I was like, “Yeah, yeah, let me try, why not?” And, it’s true, some of the people who I was working with were interested in it and we made great records, I mean good records if you may, and some of the people I were working were like, “No, no, no, I want the old stuff, I want to keep on doing the same thing.” And I’m not saying it was better or whatever, those two approaches. They wanted to do the same thing and at one point I just couldn’t do it. I was like, “I’ve done this already and now five years later I’m not into doing the same thing.” But you were saying about A Tribe Called Quest or whatever… So, I got more of a bad rep and the forums and the Internet wasn’t around at that time, but I got way more of a bad rap than you when I started to do some electronic music, when I started to be a DJ in raves and in techno and in electronic music clubs, and when I started doing remixes for electronic music bands. Way more than you. A-Trak People used to shit on me when I was 15, the DJs were like, “He’s just winning because he looks cute.” DJ Mehdi You looked cute. A-Trak I like this whole subplot that we have going on. I want to add something to what Mehdi was talking about also in terms of, you know, a lot of us that came up as hip-hop producers always had the curiosity to do other stuff and I’ve seen this in so many producers where a lot of producers have a little stash of beats that’s just kind of on the side. When you first start making them for the first year or so, you don’t really play them to more people than a few of your friends because you just figure like, “Yeah, that’s just me fucking around with non-hip-hop stuff and I don’t really know where it’s going, but I’m just kind of doing it because I’m bored with rap type of thing.” I think now with all these genres converging, like we’re talking about, a lot of us... Nick and I have conversations about that all the time where you just start fantasizing about your favorite producers and thinking, “I want to hear Mannie Fresh’s stash of shit that he’s not putting out, because it doesn’t sound like Cash Money or whatever.” It’s something that we always wanted to approach when we started the label, Fool’s Gold, was like at one point we got to just step to these producers… older, established producers, and see what’s in their vaults. Torsten Schmidt Did that Mannie Fresh, Van Dyke Parks record...? A-Trak I haven’t gotten... Mannie Fresh is hard to reach, and I haven’t really tried yet. I’m saying it’s something that we all, in the deepest of the deep nerd talk, it’s something that’ll come up, like, “Man, I know that there’s producers in hip-hop that have produced other stuff that we haven’t even heard,” you know? I think all of us just get to that point where it’s just like, like you said, how many 96bpm beats can you make? Just to come back to what I can relate to and me being close to my brother and stuff, I remember that’s how Chromeo started was... I know my brother was in a band when he was like 14 playing Zeppelin covers and stuff. He always had the playing-guitar, writing-songs side to him. I think hip-hop, for me and him, us growing up listening to classic rock and getting into hip-hop when we were teenagers was fun because you learn these boundaries and to stick with those boundaries that are really rigid in hip-hop production is kind of an exercise in style. Like, how dope can your beat be if it’s within this tempo range and it everything is sampled and the drum sounds have a certain texture that’s proper to hip-hop and everything? That’s a great challenge. Again, to go back to stuff I know, like scratching, when Q-Bert got to a point that was so advanced with his scratches that he would always scratch on the same sound and it was like, “How ill can you get with your solos if you’re only scratching on the “ah” all the time and on “fresh”?” Like, these two sounds. How musical can you get with it? Those boundaries become really stimulating for a while as an artist. Then I think after... At one point you kind of reach the end of that. I remember when Dave started Chromeo. He was like, “This is my non-hip-hop project.” He wasn’t even telling his boys in the hip-hop scene that he was doing that because... DJ Mehdi It was his non-hip-hop project, but he was surprised that his records were in the hip-hop section. A-Trak No, he was surprised they were in the techno section. DJ Mehdi Yeah, but you see what I mean. A-Trak Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, but all of us had to adapt to these conceptions of genres and everything, you know? That makes me think of something else that sometimes I reflect on. I was talking about how when you produce hip-hop there’s these really tight boundaries. I think I was having a conversation with my friend XXXChange, who produces Spank Rock, and some of Melisa’s records, Kid Sister. We were talking about hip-hop production and dance production. I always felt like it’s easier for a hip-hop producer to make a uptempo dance type of song than for a dance producer to make rap beats. I’ll even go flat out and say that... Torsten Schmidt That’s what Goldie said all the time anyway. How many good downtempo tracks...? A-Trak I hate downtempo. I’m not saying that towards Goldie because I’ve heard of his temper. He screamed at my previous agent, he made her cry. She is really sweet. I’ll even say, it’s an exception… it’s a crazy exception when a dance producer can make a good hip-hop-style beat. DJ Mehdi Name one. A-Trak I don’t know. Earlier I was talking about how dance music has this whole mysterious studio wizardy side to it. Guys who make dance tracks get really involved with the fine details of all these different settings of compression and filtering basslines in and out, and doing all these weird sounds that sound like shit that comes out of a cavern, and when you try to bring that to hip-hop, a lot of the dance guys don’t know how to strip it down enough and it ends up sounding extremely overproduced. Whereas, if you’re a hip-hop guy, you know about old-school electro, you know about the old drum machines and you know about drum programming. I feel like hip-hop drum programming is harder anyways. To program drums at a slower tempo is way harder, just like beat matching is harder at a slower tempo. It’s easy to mix fast records, when you get slower you hear every detail and every subtlety of your programming is super-important. So, when you bring it up faster it’s just kind of fun. You’re like: “Hey, let me make a danceable track,” and you’re like: “I could dance to this!” Whereas the dance dudes will slow it down and they’ll still be all like with these weird Reason sounds and you’re like: “No, no stop it, stop it, no!” Give me a loop and a good drum program, and that’s all you need for a good rap beat. I always like to think about that because the dudes that have the illest drum programming are hip-hop dudes. DJ Mehdi A-Trak Premier and Dilla. DJ Mehdi … who applies to the first category of artist I was referring to. He has had the same formula for 15 years and we still love it. A-Trak He made that blueprint so he can do it for as long as he wants, exactly. But when you think about how many people, how many bedroom producers will just listen to the drum programming of someone like Premier or Jay Dee? I don’t think there’s similar examples for faster music. Maybe just because in that template there’s more room for little mistakes that make the beat good and stuff. Torsten Schmidt Somehow I give you that to a certain point but I’m pretty sure that people like Theo or Kerri Chandler would probably slightly disagree. A-Trak I’m over simplifying a bit to make my point. Torsten Schmidt Or are you just basically saying you want to play faster music because it’s more fun to play with at night and you don’t have to stay that sober and you can get away with things a lot easier? A-Trak It’s more about the way music is right now. I just feel there’s more dance music that I enjoy in 2007. Torsten Schmidt Isn’t it kind of interesting how dance music has become so much more popular but dancing as such, not? A-Trak Yeah, that’s true. DJ Mehdi That’s because it’s been a while since you’ve seen him dance. You’re going to be surprised. A-Trak I just think there used to be words that used to be really taboo that aren’t anymore. I catch myself talking about dance music and about pop in this whole lecture, in ways that aren’t ironic and aren’t pejorative at all, but a few years ago, pop was taboo and dance music was taboo. Dance was something that we laughed at – it was fucking “I’m A Barbie Girl” and those kind of songs, that’s what I used to call dance. If you asked me what category Daft Punk was I’d be like, “Well, it’s just dope.” Now you can say “dance,” now you can say “pop” and it’s not frowned upon. DJ Mehdi This is your own case, though. I know for sure that coming from Detroit, for example somebody like Dilla, pretty much knew what dance music was. A-Trak But I don’t know if he’d have used the word “dance” is what I’m saying. DJ Mehdi Techno! Which is even worse, which was even worse in ’96. A-Trak Eminem once said: “Nobody listens to techno.” Talk about Moby, that’s the best thing. If you think Moby makes techno, then you’re just great. Why isn’t he great anymore? Sidebar… Torsten Schmidt Shall we have a little moment for Marshall? The interesting notion that underlying in there all the time, is this whole concept of progression. Progression has always been a main theme in dance music no matter if it’s house, techno, drum & bass, hip-hop, whatever… A-Trak I still don’t like drum & bass. Torsten Schmidt But isn’t drum & bass to a degree an example of a genre, which took the whole progression aspect a little bit too serious and therefore confined itself in a lot more ways than was probably healthy? With like all about the next level, the next level. And, yes, between 1990 and let’s say ’95 you saw this progression and from there and you’re just progressing in a lot smaller steps. A-Trak If anything I would give credit to hip-hop producers in that aspect of production in terms of progressing and I’m talking about rap producers. We were talking about how rap started integrating electronic sounds. Sometimes I’ll hear some obscure-ass Southern tracks with the illest synth sounds and some drum sounds that could be in an LCD [Soundsystem] beat, and I’ll listen to this and remind myself that the guy who produced this is probably 19 and I’ll be like: “Yo, does he even realize how ill he is?” Because a lot of stuff like that in rap that stays interesting, where I feel like the way synthesizers and big drum machine sounds snuck into the soundscape of rap is really dope to me because there was no pretension to it. It wasn’t like: “Man, I’m gonna make this next-level shit.” People in rap don’t talk about how great their equipment is and stuff. Not that much. The way that the synthesized sounds snuck into rap hasn’t been as pretentious as what you’re talking about in certain sub genres of rap music, of dance music I mean, where producers are actively searching for that next level. Torsten Schmidt Yeah, but the interesting thing when you’re talking about 19-year-old kids is when you’ve got people, especially in let’s say London, from the grime/dubstep sort of arena, that are definitely too young to have been raving in 1986 and all of a sudden these genres go through very similar cycles, even in the sound aesthetics and what-not and all of a sudden you find Skream doing the track which essentially could be a Plus 8 record in 1991, like a Speedy J record or... It’s very interesting how there seems to be just because of the club dynamic, certain aesthetics seem to come forward and happen forth. DJ Mehdi You quoted the London example, but it’s pretty much an exception I think. It’s actually kind of only happening in England, I think so. A-Trak Unless you have some obscure German reference that we don’t know. Torsten Schmidt Yeah, but speaking of obscure local references, obviously a lot of people usually have this notion, “You’re only speaking of London, you’re only speaking of New York,” or whatever. Neither of us here is from there. I think in the room there’s about a handful of people from London. Half of them are press, and everyone else is from somewhere else really. Can you probably talk a little bit about creating these local infrastructures to make a sufficient... DJ Mehdi It’s actually a good question. The joke you were making about Germany, for example. Germany has the biggest hip-hop scene outside of the United States. German hip-hop is bigger than French hip-hop, no matter what. Torsten Schmidt But that was different in the mid-’90s DJ Mehdi But I’ve never heard a German hip-hop record using a Kraftwerk or a DJ Hell or Gigolo or a minimal techno sound and make it their own and saying, “Hey, I’m German, this is what’s happening in Germany right now, and I’m hip-hop and I’ll make it German hip-hop,” for some reason. Maybe you know an example that I don’t know, but for some reason English people have less difficulties merging these sounds and that’s probably why drum & bass had such a good ground in England. That didn’t happen in Germany and it certainly didn’t happen in France. And when myself and a few others were trying to do this, we were very, very underground and we still are in France. Really, Justice is really the first successful record to come out of this scene and there have been many, many, many tries. A band called TTC, for example, in France was doing this since their first album, which was 1997 or something, and everybody was throwing stones at them and tomatoes and eggs and were like: “What are you doing? This is a hip-hop concert why are you playing some techno?” It was natural for them because they vibed to DJ Funk and to Daft Punk and to Public Enemy and they were like: “This is the music we like, this is how we do it.” But it’s very, very, very marginal, very underground. And TTC and all of other French people that you may not have heard of, but a lot of people have tried to do this on a more wider scale, quite pop music level. And it wasn’t possible until very, very recently when Ms Dynamite, The Streets, Lily Allen probably, I’m only thinking about recent examples, but whatever, the Bristol scene, Massive Attack, Portishead, all those guys were making interesting music and commercial music at the same time and they were merging genres without even having to explain themselves and that I don’t know if it happened elsewhere. In my experience I don’t remember it happening in Germany or in France and not even in the US. Torsten Schmidt Obviously, there’s the little language element as well. For whatever reason, people don’t like to listen to German lyrics outside of the Alsace or wherever, but yes, there… DJ Mehdi Once again, maybe I don’t know, there were other examples that I don’t think about right now but I think for some reason that the British music scene, maybe the industry, maybe the fact that it has such a long musical history and knowledge… I don’t know, maybe the schools, how you are trained to [make] music, maybe the art schools, the music schools, I just don’t know, but all those examples that’s why we love English music, British music. A-Trak I think the British music industry is exceptional. I think England is an exceptional place to make music and to listen to music. We in America don’t realize that radio in Europe is actually good. There’s some stuff that takes off in America that could never work in Europe, like satellite radio. Satellite radio works out here because commercial, actual radio stations are such garbage that there are still people who want to hear some real, good radio. But if you go to England and hear good music on the radio and you try to tell someone there’s this other kind of radio that you have to have reception from a satellite and pay a subscription but the music’s really great, they’ll be like: “Why don’t you just turn on your fucking radio.” They don’t realize that out here the channels aren’t the same. I think England is a great ground for good music to work, to reach people. Torsten Schmidt You were referring to it earlier when you said France and England are only 20 clicks away from each other, but still it’s a big deal for Parisian artists to go over there. I don’t know how many groups from Marseille have played in London but there might be a similar thing. Obviously, there is the whole language aspect and everyone in the western world speaks English… DJ Mehdi There is the language, there is also the whole kind of British music scene being that interesting and has such quick attention. It’s also a little bit, how could I say this – sorry, because English is not my first language and I have to think about it – it’s also a bit protective. A lot of French artists tried to make it in England or in America, of course, but in England especially. But the English music scene is so vibrant itself it doesn’t really need French artists that do the same thing as they already do. The first reviews I was reading for my album were like: “Yeah, this is music that could only happen in France.” They were like: “What’s the point? In England we are way past that, merging hip-hop with electro, we already did this.” And in one way you guys did. They did. So it’s also very hard. From the artist’s point of view, and it’s true for England, it’s even more true for America, you always have more strength when you are innocent about all this. When you don’t know how the English music industry and the English press and radio, how hard they are, and you just don’t want to know. If you are going to struggle to have your music played in England, or release your music in America, you better not know what is really happening because you would just give up before. When you don’t know, when it’s your first or second album, when you’re lucky enough like I was to have the opportunity to play there and to convince people, even if it’s small scale and gets bigger and bigger and bigger, you’re just lucky. Torsten Schmidt But, rather than discussing the advantages and disadvantages of being in London, I was actually more interested in how to make it in either Montreal or Paris or, god knows where, Timbuktu, Frankfurt, or any other city. Are there any lessons that you learnt or things that you would do differently now having committed one or two mistakes before? A-Trak Just in terms of as an artist breaking through to elsewhere in the world? The internet makes it so much easier. That’s the big part of it. Nowadays, when you do a show in a whole other country, most of the people that come to your show will have heard a few of your songs or your mixes or whatever, some sort of musical reference to you which wasn’t the case a few years ago. It’s easier today to break through in other markets, I think. There’s also the side of it that’s like – to come back to the reality of the path of someone like Mehdi and myself where I started – I was in hip-hop for many years and then went to other genres. When you travel you face different levels of difficult audiences in terms of what they expect you to do. In terms of hip-hop specifically, if you’re from North America and you haven’t tried to do a show in Europe and England, for example, you might not realize this, but the further away you go from the birthplace of hip-hop, the more people are stubbornly attached to the pure hip-hop aesthetic. That’s something that I had to fight. Mehdi was talking about having to fight in terms of the sound of his music, what I had to fight was the people in my audience. Going to England and doing shows where the DJs playing before me, for a while, always did exactly, exactly, exactly the same sets of mid-’90s rap. It’s something that was mind-boggling and still is to me to talk to certain DJs in Europe, where I would think if you’re far away from where a lot of these American rappers come from, you can pick from different sounds of rap and just appreciate everything. But on the contrary, a lot of the guys that I talked to will still think that Jay-Z is commercial and wack and anything on Roc-A-Fella is not good and all the majors are wack and can we please have Leaders Of The New School back and stuff like that. And you’re just like: “Dude, it’s 2007, have you listened to Jay Z’s records?” It’s so crazy to still have these conversations because Jay-Z’s like starting to lose it, to go from the progression of at first making commercial records and not everyone listened and noticed at first he was actually a good rapper. Then he made undeniably dope records that everybody really should have realized that he was the best rapper alive. And now he’s sunk to fall off a bit and you talk to these guys that are still like: “Jay Z, he has champagne, what the fuck?” Like, KMD didn’t have champagne. Torsten Schmidt Dealing with the Taliban is a hard thing, no matter what kind of headwear they have – dealing with hip-hop Taliban, it’s the same as going to Afghanistan. A-Trak And I don’t want to lump all of Europe into that. I’ll do some shows in regional North American markets and face the same thing also, but that’s something I have had to face. It’s just ill when you’re an artist or a musician and, in an ideal world, you would only have to worry about the music that you make and making something that you’re proud of. But there’s a whole other side of the battle that’s getting it to the right people and having your shows have the vibe that you want it to have. And when you go through certain transitions you always have to go through those phases where you just have to fight for it and people just stubbornly want the old you. Torsten Schmidt So, essentially at the same point as, let’s say Miles [Davis], who heaps of jazz critics argue killed jazz by doing fusion, which I guess for most of our generation is when records got interesting and where gazillions of samples came from, when did turntablism become too much of an Olympic sport for you? A-Trak That’s a good example. Well, for me it really happened in stages. I really don’t want to make it seem like I’ve turned my back on turntablism. A lot of the shows on this tour I’ll still do a solo somewhere towards the end of the night, just to make it the cherry on top of the sundae kind of thing. And even when I don’t literally do a turntablism solo, I still cut and stuff like that, so it’s not like I’m not interested in turntablism any more. It went from getting out of the battle scene, which was a really long time ago for me. People still ask me: “Do you still battle?” The last time I battled was in 2000. That’s a long time ago. So getting out of the battle scene and then discovering DJing in a more general sense, doing shows where I had to do a DJ set and not only be booked because I can scratch well. So getting into DJing and selection and party-rocking and crowd-reading side of it. So, from there I started feeling like it was too much of a dichotomy where either I was doing turntablism or I was mixing, but it was too separate. So from there I wanted to bring back turntablism a bit but as a tool, as a means and not an end, as one of my tools when I’m DJing. That’s pretty close to the mentality where I am at today. Except today, at this point in time, I just feel like I don’t even need to cut at every show that I do. It’s my foundation from 10 years ago. I still love to do it, it’s a passion and something that’s part of who I am and the reason why I got into DJing. But the turntablism scene itself, when I think I grew out of it, really turned me off after a while. As I was getting into more production and learning different styles of music and everything – not to come up judgmental or anything – but to go back to watching a battle and see guys do the same stuff that we were all doing a few years earlier, you see that and you go: “Huh, yeah? I wish someone would come and change it up again.” That’s the first stage of getting through it, and then you do shows and there’s guys that look like creeps, dudes that are like the comic book guy in The Simpsons who are in the front row of your show who are like this in front of your decks. You’re just like: “Is that what the scene has become?” Torsten Schmidt Just imagine what Eddie Van Halen must feel like. A-Trak I don’t know. If anything like that will bring up a certain amount of disgust in me and I got to watch myself when I feel like that because I still like to cut and I still… I don’t want to overlook it, because I still feel it’s something that I can do that some of my DJ peers can’t, but my mentality now is it’s a means to an end it’s not the end itself. For years, when I was heavy into turntablism – ’97 to 2000, 2001 – every year there were new styles and new techniques being invented, so the technical side of it was so stimulating. Technically, it was mushrooming, it was bubbling to such an extreme level that people were interested in going to see a show that only had turntablism for the whole night just because it was dazzling. It really was. If you saw a show six months ago and then went to see another one and some dude’s invented a whole other style and you were like: “This guy’s dope.” Inevitably there’s only so many things you can invent. Again, we were talking about boundaries earlier, the way turntablism has been for a long time, you take this guy out of here, this has been the limited set up and after a while you’re like: “OK, we’ve got two Technics SL-1200 MK II turntables, a Shure M-44/7 and a choice of maybe three mixers, at some point the DJs ran out of new stuff to do. It’s weird because a lot of my DJ friends kind of gave up on DJing. We were like – me and The Allies, that’s the DJs I was heavily rolling with and touring with in those years – we had this whole network of friends. So when you went to these cities you hung out with this dude who was this dope scratch DJ from that city. And then, when you start going back to that city and your boy is now working at the bank, you don’t want to knock him for getting a real job but at the same time you’re like: “Damn, are you really uninspired and is everyone else going to get uninspired?” That’s just when the technical side of it wasn’t enough to sustain the whole movement anymore. Today, to me it’s a lot more about taking that as a foundation but more than anything being a good DJ or a good producer is much more of a bigger concern. Torsten Schmidt I don’t know where Theo is, but you were just mentioning “this guy,” now you were championing an art that was heralding turntables an instrument and “yadda, yadda, yadda,” and all of a sudden, there’s this heresy of a computer coming in? A-Trak You want me to talk about bringing the computer into it? One thing that I find strange with myself when I look at my opinions objectively is that I was always the youngest dude in my circles, but I think in certain ways I was always the purist. I was the one that was really like “You can’t do that,” kind of thing. I remember when Craze first messed around with a prototype of Final Scratch – Craze is one of my DJ partners from Miami – when he first told me about the prototype of Final Scratch that he tried out, for so many reasons I was just like: “That’s wack, why would you do that? There’s no way it’s going to sound the same and are you really going to bring a fucking laptop to the club, are you stupid?” I wasn’t literally insulting him like that but I was just: “Right, you do you, I do me” – kind of thing and we were boys and he was a great DJ and I knew he would freak it in his way but I wasn’t interested in it. But the first instance where this whole technology that Serato does now that really captured me was… before Serato came out, a lot of people don’t know this, before Serato came out with their Scratch Live program, Serato is a plug-in company from New Zealand and they made a plug in for Pro Tools that was called Serato Scratch and you could load an audio file and you had to connect it in this really complicated way with your Pro Tools rig, but it simply allowed you to scratch, with a control record, a file that you loaded up on your computer. But you couldn’t apply the full song because you needed way too much RAM but that was the first thing that Serato developed. And that’s something that caught me because there were instances where I wanted to scratch on something that either I didn’t have on vinyl, or didn’t exist on vinyl, or I didn’t want to ruin my vinyl and suddenly I had a new solution for that. Then they started developing the standalone program, and I was doing beta testing for them before it came out, and even when they finished the program, it really took me a while to get used to DJing on it. There was a period of at least six months where I would bring my laptop to a club and play half of the songs off Serato and half the songs off of actual vinyl. That might make me sound like an idiot because you’re like: “Why can’t you just switch?” But this is when Serato first, first, first came out and a lot of people didn’t know about it. It was hard for me… I got past the whole corniness of working with the laptop on stage and that hurdle at that point was getting used to selecting songs off of a laptop. This new generation of DJs won’t face that difficulty because they never were trained in doing sets with one crate. But when you’re used to DJing off of vinyl, and anybody that’s been DJing for years knows this, you’re used to having 70 records to choose from for your set or whatever number. Even in the simple, primal way that you actually sift through your records in your crate, and you look at the cover and you know what song it is, you don’t have to read the title, you just know everything that you just passed. Whereas on the [laptop] you’re like: “Les Rythmes Digitales, OK, not that,” it’s just a different process of thinking about how I played my records, and I really had to get used to that and eventually I went all the way on Serato. Actually, I want to say something about that, seeing guys like Mehdi, and even when I see Mehdi I can tell he’s from a hip-hop background and a vinyl background, but there are guys who are all the way electro, techno DJs on CDJs… this past year I saw some DJs including Mehdi on CDJs freak the CDJs… like subvert the music they were playing way more than what people in America have been doing with vinyl and/or Serato and that gave me a new push of inspiration this year. So like, do more to my records when I mix them. Like just a second ago, when I was talking about for years I’ve been wanting to take the concept of turntablism where your record is simply a tool and you make what music you want to make from it, to apply that to a mix was something that was like a mission, the holy grail for me for years. But for some reason every DJ that knew – not every, but most DJs that I knew played on vinyl and Serato still ended up simply mixing song after song. And it’s really, even although I don’t personally use CDJs, it fascinated me when I first saw good DJs on CDJs really mess with like alter pitch and the looping and using them more as tools and stuff. I don’t know, there’s something as much as I love Serato and I am endorsed by them and I use it at all of my shows, I think it makes you lazy in your DJing and that’s the big danger of Serato. It makes you lazy on so many levels. The first one being sorting by bpm’s – that makes DJing a whole other experience to be able to sort your songs by bpm. Part of it is cool because it’ll make you try mixes you may not have tried because until you saw the two bpm’s match on your list of songs you might not have thought, ‘Hey, this is mixable with that’, but in reality that’s the romantic way of thinking about it. In reality you make your playlist, sort by bpms and you play it in similar bpms. That makes you lazy. There definitely was a point for me this year where I felt that I was being lazy with the way I played on Serato and wanted to get more creative with it and a large part of that was seeing a few people on CDJs. It’s just ill to me that I come from turntablism, I come from the scene where people do the most with records, in theory. You take these records, and like you were saying earlier, the turntable is a musical instrument. So how come when I see Boys Noize, who is a technical DJ from Germany – your fair land [to Torsten Schmidt] – from a whole other world of DJing… how come when I see him DJ, it inspires me more than a fellow turntablist? I saw him play on three CDJs, where every single mix he knew where the breakdown was and what’s the strategic part to bring in the next song from the previous song and again, using tools. Seeing that was like, man, like that dude is freaking his records, doing a lot with his records. Stuff like that would make me go back to my Serato set-up and be like: “How can I take that approach of DJing, that way of mixing, and apply it to the set-up that’s mine?” Which is Serato and then this effects box or whatever else and maybe add a bit of scratching and bringing back records in the way that I know how to do it. That’s how I’m currently coming up with the style of DJing that I really want to make my own, which is what I’m really working on now. Torsten Schmidt Can you probably, since you received so much kudos for your style of DJing from him, could you elaborate a little bit about what it is you do and your motivations behind it? DJ Mehdi First, I have to say I had the same shock when I heard that this came out. You have to understand that in America it’s pretty much everywhere, where I know it’s the case in Europe and the standout in Europe is CDJs, Pioneer CDJs is just the standout, everywhere. It’s kind of a problem when a DJ shows up with Serato and you have to de-plug, sometimes the mixers are screwed in the tables and the engineer is like, “Argh,” just different. So I was obviously using vinyl and bringing some records, and the first time I came on tour in America, the first time I played here, for example in Toronto with this guy over there, Mario, I had some records I was playing vinyl and I had one very, very heavy bag of hip-hop records and one heavy, heavy, heavy bag of techno and electro records and it was just I couldn’t take it any more. If you had to do six or seven shows in five days, your records, you worry about losing them, breaking them, you just can’t take it anymore. And my other friends had the same shock. For example, my friend DJ Feadz from Ed Banger who is Uffie’s producer, he was probably the best DJ I knew and he was doing some stuff with the CDs that couldn’t be done with the vinyl, and that’s where Pioneer, I think, had the best tool because the other CD turntables were emulating what you could do with the vinyl, but CDJs were just taking it somewhere else. For example, the table is not even turning. At first I was like: “Where are you putting your hands, what are you doing? The table isn’t even turning.” He was like: “Fuck the fact it’s not turning. Try it, you will see.” And after this tour I had to go to Australia, which is even worse, and I had to switch and I made the decision to leave my records at home, to take my iPod and my computer and to burn CDs in the plane while going to Australia. I had six or seven shows in Australia and I had no records. I had a CD case, a big pile of blank CDs and I had to burn CDs in the plane if I wanted to do the shows that I had to do. So, I had to go to the CDJs and do something different because playing with turntables just wasn’t where it was anymore. So from there being influenced by Feadz and Boys Noize and techno DJs, there’s not that many hip-hop DJs that I’ve seen using CDJs, I’ve tried to still do the same hip-hop routine but add some electro stuff to it. The more and more I was being able with my technique to bridge and to put some hip-hop or some ’70s or ’80s electro or funk into some electro and reacting more easily to what the audience was trying to hear also. That went in parallel with the fact that Ed Banger was becoming more and more popular and that the audience sometimes don’t really understand that there’s not one Ed Banger sound, but there are more hip-hop and Justice are more electro, for example. And I’m not playing always electro records and I have to have more tools in my bag, if I wanted to switch from one style to the other so I found myself very happy with the CDJs and still not understanding what is happening here. But I appreciate the fact that some high-end technicians, like A-Trak, was able to change his tools in the middle [of his way] like that. If you were a guitar player once again and at one point a person went: “No, no, no guitar is over, you have to learn how to play the violin,” or whatever, you’d be like: “Whatever, my tool is the guitar, I play the guitar,” so once again there’s not one way of thinking, it’s just do what you have to do. Torsten Schmidt Coming from Paris, obviously, there has always been a bit of a connection at least in the latter part of your career with that other dirty word, “fashion.” So when did fashion become more important than music? DJ Mehdi I love this subject. I’m from the hip-hop side of it and I’m on Ed Banger which is probably the most fashionable label in Paris right now. Overseas, when I go to Japan, people receive our music through channels like Collete, which is a very fashion, high-end store in Paris and those kind of websites that play some cool music and sync it to fashion shows. Which is not the case at all in Paris. Not at all, at all, at all. People don’t understand how we are disconnected from the fashion world. Me, myself, I have way more connections with the people that are out doing the riots in the streets and in the suburbs in Paris, which are the less fashionable people in the world, than to Karl Lagerfeld or to Yves Saint Laurent or to Collette store. I mean, I encounter this misunderstanding all of the time, and people think that we are a fashionable label and that we are in fashion, and that there are connections in between our worlds, which there is not. I mean some of us like fashion, and some of us don’t. That’s pretty much it. That’s all. It’s not like being from Paris, you have to drink wine, eat cheese and like fashion. I personally don’t like fashion. I understand that people obviously think that we’re all linked, because it’s Paris and because we live pretty much the same way of life, or whatever. It’s just not the case. It’s a big, big misunderstanding. I experience every day… It’s not a problem. Could be worse. Torsten Schmidt Obviously, you live quite well off that misunderstanding. DJ Mehdi Exactly, but being at Ed Banger and us Ed Banger artists, and even Pedro to some extent, you have to cope with this misunderstanding that we are fashionable. And sometimes they don’t even understand how Pedro, which is such a fashionable guy, would play a Jay-Z record or something more ghetto like a Noreaga record in a set, and they would be like, “It’s weird, this just doesn’t match,” or whatever. Not that, but they would think, “Oh he plays it, that’s maybe because…” Whatever. They try to… it’s just not the case. It’s just different and that’s something interesting about Paris which rings a bell about the stuff you are saying about London, Paris, Montreal… I personally think that, being from Paris, I have to make, that’s how I see it, the most Parisian sound, the music that is the closest to what I live in my city to spark some interest to you guys that have another relation to your own city, and another reality. In the same way, for example Martin Scorsese or Spike Lee are doing New York movies and go to the world and say, “This is how New York is,” that’s how I feel about my music and I want to say, “This is how Paris is.” That’s how I feel comfortable coming to Toronto, New York or going to London and saying, “This is what Paris is.” For example, last night we played in Chicago and I made a slight mistake. I was like, “Hey we’re in Chicago, I’m going to play some Chicago records.” I was playing some DJ Funk and playing some whatever, whatever. I was playing a lot of Chicago records and the kids were like, “Whatever, we want to hear some Justice. We want to hear some Paris music. We want to hear SebastiAn, we want to hear Daft Punk.” We ended up playing like 15 Daft Punk songs and 10 Justice songs while we were in the birthplace of house music. I was like, “Okay, being in Chicago and trying to play Chicago music, let’s just not…” If you’re from Paris, just do Paris. A-Trak And our audiences are younger. You know we were talking about earlier, you asked me what point I came to a certain distance with turntablism. There’s also a certain distance I had to take from like the ’90s aesthetic of rap that I came up in, and that has to do with the reality that nowadays if you do music your audience is mad young. There was a point maybe four years ago or something where I looked at my crate, I was still playing vinyl and I looked at my crate, and I saw like a bunch of Tribe records and stuff like that. Thinking, realizing to the people that come to my shows now this is old-school. It was still the core of my set. To have that realization of like, “Wow, the core of my set is old-school. Do I want to be an old-school DJ?” I mean, that’s a crazy realization. Yesterday Mehdi played some Chicago house records and told me he was surprised that the crowd wasn’t really reacting, but it’s the audience is young, they don’t even know that that’s the heritage of their city. And it’s tripped out because we invited DJ Gant-Man who’s like a really kind of legendary Chicago house and ghetto type producer to come and hang out. He did some beats for Kid Sister and he’s going to do some stuff for Fool’s Gold also. So I told him, “Come through, do a little surprise set at the end.” And he’s watching me and Mehdi play in Chicago, and he’s like, “Man this reminds me of going to France in the late ’90s.” We’re playing basically house music, it’s a certain electro-this, techno-that, whatever. But it’s music that you would think that when you play in Chicago, it’s in the Chicago concept, like Chicago has such a heritage in that. And to hear one of the most important figures in Chicago in that style of music talk about Paris so many times in the conversation that evening, it just shows you that everybody has their references. For someone like me from North America that plays a lot of records in my electro sets that are from Europe. For me it’s a mind-fuck to go to Europe and meet some of the artists whose records I play a lot and realize that to guys in Europe they still have their eyes set on America a lot. You can have all these conceptions of like... When you go to someone’s town do they realize that they’re the shit? You know what I mean? So like this past year... Torsten Schmidt Classic case of grass is greener on the other side. A-Trak Yeah so like in the last year or two Paris has been hugely important in the music scene but I talk to a lot of Parisians that still have this fascination for like, “Yeah but the Americans,” and, “Yeah but the Americans.” It’s weird to hear that in the conversation. “Yeah, but the Americans are looking at you right now…” Torsten Schmidt Let’s do a reality check like when Daft Punk and Cassius and Motorbass and all those guys blew up, there wasn’t hardly a club in Paris playing this kind of music maybe apart from the Rex on Wednesdays or so. DJ Mehdi Exactly. Torsten Schmidt So what’s the story now then? Do you get like a… DJ Mehdi Now, it’s like I was telling you, we were crossing those genres like five or six years ago nobody cared and now Justice has the No 1 record in the country. But France is... Torsten Schmidt But a No 1 record doesn’t necessarily mean that you have a vibrant club scene. And I mean you see like 45 year-old, very cultured people talking on French TV about the Justice record. I mean that’s not going to talk really to 16-year-old kids in the banlieues, right? DJ Mehdi I wouldn’t know. It’s pretty hard to explain because it’s true that even when Daft Punk were selling millions of records, I’m pretty sure they sold like 600,000 records in France, which is like selling three million in America. I’m pretty sure that even at that point they were definitely the most powerful French band in the country, we still had to fight for some good music or that kind of music in regular clubs. I just couldn’t explain. I think it’s just easier for commercial clubs to play whatever is playing on the radio, and I just don’t know. It’s even funnier to think that when we started, France just didn’t care about us, and London actually took notice first, and even America, before France which was ours. And we’re still, except for Justice, the rest of us are pretty, I wouldn’t say underground but we’re pretty like leftfield, like you said, in France and I think we will remain that way. I just don’t know. Maybe it’s just not for France, this music. Which is even better because I’m here now. Torsten Schmidt Well at least you get to travel a bit, yes. I might be oversimplifying here, but I think one of the weird notions that people have to realize when they get to Paris for example, that there’s definitely dramatic differences in various parts of the city. If you go to all the inner bits where all the tourists go, the Louvre and all the beautiful restaurants and all those flats that I guess maybe 5% of us here in this room will ever be able to afford. Paris inner-city life is not exactly cheap and it’s not exactly made for young, creative people. DJ Mehdi It’s a big city. It’s pretty much the biggest city in the European Union. Not Paris as itself but the whole area is like 11 or 12 million people. As in New York, or as in Chicago, or as in London for example, it has its scenes. It’s pretty big, like some bands are very, very, very popular and they make a lot of money and you have never heard of them, and there are very rich and very poor parts of the city… as every big city, but that’s what I like about it. That’s what I love, and that’s definitely something that we are trying to do as to like diversify our music which is not always very readable if I can say, from an overseas point of view. But we definitely represent Paris in its diversity at Ed Banger, and we love this. We are very different, one from the other, but the music just connects. Torsten Schmidt On the one hand, I don’t know what the office is these days, but the old office was very much in the center of the city, but when you look at the way you portray yourselves, let’s say with the videos, you’re championing a lot of the working-class culture of the country with the cars and parking lots and stuff and the handshakes… and what is the significance of the banlieues, outside of the riots, in French popular culture? DJ Mehdi It’s very important because first, style, music, a lot of it comes from there because it’s the youth, and I think in every western country the youth plays a very important role in the culture. But as far as I’m concerned, I am from outside of Paris, I am from the banlieues, which is the suburban area of Paris, which is the poorest, and it’s just who I am and I was never in some bad trouble. I was never a thug or a drug dealer or whatever, it was just how I grew up, going to school, my family, and I wouldn’t like my music to be only one message. I wouldn’t like my music to be only dance, for example, or to be only love or to be – what did you call it – elevator music or whatever, hotel music. I love the fact that music, and it’s even more difficult when you do instrumental music, but we have the videos, when you can have one track that says: “Hey, that’s who I am, I’m from this part of the city, and this is what I’m experiencing. And I also like to dance and I also like to have sex with girls and I also like to have whatever...cashews. I also like to do all those things at the same time, but as far as I’m concerned that’s how I used image, that’s how I use my videos and that’s just who I am and I’m glad that people not from Paris could understand this. Which makes, once again, the fashion issue even funnier, I love this. Torsten Schmidt It’s slightly ironic, yes I know, but I think it’s a lot harder to be loved for the wrong reasons than the right ones, isn’t it? How can you turn that away? DJ Mehdi That’s the subject of another lecture. Torsten Schmidt Coming back to more serious things, because fashion people will be fashion people, they will be here today and somewhere else in two minutes, but your friends that you grew up with will not be able to move that quickly and, obviously, a year ago when Sarkozy was not the president but was whatever he was at the time like heading the internal department – I think that raised a lot of questions throughout the world or at least in Europe of the role both, the youth in modern society and especially immigrant youth. Can you give us a first-hand account, because for most people, I think up until that point the notion of youth was more a marketing concept or something that happened 800 years ago in 1968 or so, but the actual thing that you can really challenge the state authority was a pretty powerful moment? DJ Mehdi It’s still not finished actually in France. There is still a lot of problems of what you guys call riots, which is not even what was actually happening or whatever. It was a very serious, serious time where a lot of problems were raised and were dealt with with absurdity and sometimes even stupidity. Some young people were burning their own school and their leaders were telling them: “Don’t do this because this school that you are burning is your way out of this.” But they didn’t care because they didn’t want to understand the situation. So, it’s a very, very tough subject and it’s not something that I can explain – especially in English – that I can explain easily. So, it was an interesting – if I can say that – time and it’s still not finished and the problems that it raised will not be dealt with until 10, 15, 20 years because it’s very, very serious. The generation that suffered those problems right now will not find a solution in two or three years. It’s not going to be solved like that, because Sarkozy is our president or whatever. I would have a very hard, hard time explaining myself about this. It’s a tough subject, and once again English is not my first language, so it is very subtle and sometimes it touches an absurd point, where something that you can just not understand and you can just not make those rioters understand and they did not want to understand anymore. Some people were like: “Yeah, yeah, they don’t want to understand,” and some people were just like: “This is just stupid.” It’s a very tough subject, and it’s still not finished because the problems we were dealing with are still pretty much here and now that Sarkozy became our president it raised another kind of strength. A lot of neighborhoods are still fighting with police at the moment. Still, one or two years after. So it is a situation, definitely. Sorry, if I cannot be more… Torsten Schmidt We don’t want to press you on it. Now, you, [A-Trak], are obviously in Montreal facing slightly different issues. You nevertheless left it as well and went to New York. Why did you feel you had to leave Canada? A-Trak Well, on a few levels. It’s still hard for me, I still don’t quite call New York home. I feel like this is something I need to do right now in my life to be there, but there’s a side of it, of me leaving Montreal, that had to do with needing to be more stimulated. And a side of it that was simply the convenience of being close to certain people and the convenience in terms of – I travel so much and the actual fact that it’s easier to travel in and out of New York, compared to Montreal actually was a big factor. But, I love Montreal and I find it one of the most culturally rich cities in the world. The more I’ve traveled in the course of my career, the more I’ve realized how unique Montreal is. So, it can seem a little strange for me to say that I’ve left Montreal in search of being even more stimulated artistically, but the reality is, and I don’t know how many people in here are actually from Toronto, it’s interesting to talk about this in Canada, but I feel like in Montreal, and in Canada in general, there’s a certain comfort there, that when you’re in an industry that’s very competitive, you can reach a point where it feels like that comfort gives you a plateau. Everything that I love about Canada, socially and politically in terms of how protected we are, I feel like when it comes to situations where people are at the top of their field, the reverse of that comfort and that protection that everyone has in Canada means that it’s hard to really keep going up and up and up. I mean, it’s strange, in America the risk of getting really low in your life in terms of career is really serious. In America, if you don’t have a good situation in your life, you can reach extreme lows, but if you’re a specialist in your field, and you can talk about a heart surgeon or a scratch DJ, you can reach real highs too. So, I don’t know if it’s because life is more or less challenging in Montreal or New York. But I think I started feeling like I would come back to Montreal between my travels and kind of come back to seeing my friends and doing the same stuff all the time and go to New York for a weekend and get more done musically and career-wise than I could do in two months in Montreal. And after a while I was like: “Man, I need to live in the city for a bit and make some moves.” The amount of good art and music that you have access to in New York is really a great asset when you’re in the process of developing yourself as an artist. I’ve been doing this for 12 years but I feel like a new artist right now because I have a new label and for the first time I finally have a certain output in my production. So, I’m approaching it like a new artist. And when I go to New York I would get stimulated so much that I just wanted to spend time there. And, like I said, there are many people that I work with that are based there and so it’s really in that context. I don’t know how long I’ll be there for and I don’t know if I’ll go somewhere else after. It’s a strange thing, because for years and years up until when I actually moved to New York, I always thought I’d be in Montreal my whole life but right now I’m not. I still love it. Torsten Schmidt Did you find that your sense of home has changed dramatically through touring? A-Trak Yep, yeah, that’s another thing, absolutely. I feel that for certain people to move to another country, there’s a challenge there in making a new place your home. I’m used to living out of hotels. I’m used to being in different cities every day for a significant portion of my time. So, yeah, I do think that the lifestyle that I live as a DJ and have lived for many, many, many years now affects my conception of where home is and maybe makes it easier for me to be a bit of a nomad – even though I never really felt that that was in my personality. I’m kind of a homebody and a simple person in my comforts and habits and few close friends and stuff. I didn’t think I could just be some roaming dude or whatever, but the move to New York wasn’t that hard. DJ Mehdi I still live in Paris and I pretty much don’t want to move, I think. I’m from Paris, but I travel all the time so I get to like my city even more when I’m there and the fact is I also have a family. I’m married, I have a child and I’m also very close to my parents and my uncles and cousins and stuff. A-Trak The scene that you’re part of musically is in Paris with you, that’s what’s different with you. I didn’t have people in Montreal that I work with as much. DJ Mehdi Well, internet, BlackBerry, phone, I thought that you had the internet in Canada? A-Trak We just got it. Coming from the country of the Minitel! DJ Mehdi You connect with every country everywhere. Like those guys from Australia, there’s a big, vibrant Australian scene right now and they are the most isolated country in the world, but not if you want to send a text message. If you want to send at four o’clock in the morning, you just do. I don’t know how much the scene is important for me as far as my love for Paris is concerned. Me personally, I really want to stay close to my family. That’s why. But I do like Paris and I do like living in Paris and I do like living in France. Torsten Schmidt Do we got some questions here? Oh, we tired them out. So, without wanting to turn you into a circus horse, but is there any particular reason you set this up? A-Trak I don’t know, I think we have to leave pretty soon, we didn’t really plan anything and I just thought we might have certain examples to play, and in fact I think our rambling was self-sufficient and didn’t need examples. Torsten Schmidt So more elaborate examples will be shown tonight then, I guess. Do you know any stage times? A-Trak I mean, roughly about 11.30, 12, we might have some surprise guests, I don’t know. I’m still calling friends and possibly planning surprises and stuff. Mehdi and I will DJ from about 12, 12.30 to 1.30 or so, Kavinsky’s gonna play some hard techno after. No, he’s not. Kavinsky will play after and then we’ll probably all get back together at the end of the night. Torsten Schmidt And when will Mannie Fresh be on stage then? A-Trak He’s not on stage tonight. Torsten Schmidt Thanks boys.

---

Title: Benga
Date: 2015-04-20
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/benga-diary-of-an-afro-wobbler/

Benga
Adegbenga “Benga” Adejumo, alongside his partner in crime Oliver “Skream” Jones, burst forth from the South London borough of Croydon in the early 2000s with a string of minimalist productions that would forever alter a sound that soon crystalized as dubstep. Hanging around the Big Apple record shop and making beats on Playstation, Benga’s infectious energetic take on the new London sound made him a household name while still in his teens. Following dubstep’s global takeover in the late 2000s, he joined forces with Skream and early mentor Artwork to form the trio Magnetic Man, blending their bass knowledge with big room pop.
In this lecture at the 2007 Red Bull Music Academy, Benga spoke with Emma Warren about the experimentation of his early years, cutting dubplates and the science behind using bass to drive the energy of a dance.
Hosted by EMMA WARREN Where did you record it and what happened? BENGA Well, I was at my house ’cause everything's at home. I use software. I'm a software guy... Anyway, Coki just came round, and we was building like every three weeks. And we came up with so many things - normal basslines, string riffs, and we thought that just doesn't sound fresh enough. So, the actual noise in there is just a normal sine wave with pitch bend, it just sounded right. I don't know how we got to that stage, but it just sounded right. EMMA WARREN So you were playing around with sounds, and that one came up and you said, ”That's it!“ So you built around the sound? Can we play now? Let's give it a try. (music: Benga & Coki – “Night” / applause) BENGA Wheel-up! Wheel-up! (laughs) EMMA WARREN I’m so glad you wheeled it. So this record has burst out of the dubstep scene to a certain extent, hasn't it? People in Malia are playing it, the grime lot are playing it, it's being played by all sorts of different people. What happened
with it? BENGA Well, as far as I know, it first went out to
Skepta from Boy Better
Know, and they went out with it to Malia and Ayia Napa. And what I heard was
[DJ] EZ got hold of it, and he played it as his last song. ’Cause he was more on the vibe of "What is this?", E more played it as something weird at the end of his set, not as something that hit him directly, but it created a vibe like how it is in dubstep, and that’s why it’s where it is today. EMMA WARREN Someone was telling me about YouTube clips of people who aren't from the dubstep scene going absolutely mental to the tune. BENGA Yeah, I saw that myself. It always shocks me when I see people from different genres going mad for a song. It must make sense because of the hook. When I speak to you all afterward, that's what you're gonna all be doing the little “di di di di,” it’s catchy. EMMA WARREN There's a funny story, too, about Skream ringing you up to tell you about a bus load of people in Israel going, ”Boo boo boo!“ BENGA [laughs] Yeah, it's a universal language that little noise. EMMA WARREN We’re all speaking in night tongues. Before we listen to some other stuff, I think we should talk a little bit about how important your dubs are. I see in your record bag you've got a lot of dubs, and they're all looking quite battered. How important is dubplate culture to dubstep? BENGA Well, it's more to do with the sound. On top of it, being something that people can see you take out of your bag or on the deck. It’s more … when you cut it to vinyl, it gets a slight master, the needle doesn't pick up certain frequencies from a dub. And the fact that you can wheel it up, ha ha! So yeah, dubplates are really important in dubstep. EMMA WARREN So is the cutting house a meeting point where you all meet up outside the
club? BENGA It's another thing I might go cutting on a Thursday and so will Skream. We can't hide tracks from each other. You got to try and keep something exclusive. If people know what time I'm gonna be going in there, they'll come in and hear it and be like, ”I want that one!“ EMMA WARREN So, if you want to keep a track on the super down low, the trick is to get it cut on Monday morning? BENGA [laughs] Don't even go, just send it in over the internet. EMMA WARREN Ah, that's the trick. So exclusivity has a really important role in dubstep, ’cause maybe only you or one or two others have a tune, and you might not let anyone know what that is for a long time. What does that bring to what you do as a DJ, and what you do as a producer? BENGA If it was more accessible, people might not come out to the raves. Whereas, I don't have a radio show. People want to know what I'm making and creating, but the only way they can hear it is if they come out to the raves. That's what it is. EMMA WARREN It keeps it really special and really fresh. If you think about the commitment you have to make, it's not just remembering to listen to the radio, or playback something off the internet, you don't have to download something with one click. Find yourself some people who are gonna come with you, get yourself to the rave, that level of commitment means that people are gonna get more out of it, doesn’t it? BENGA Once you get to the rave, all you've done is create a hype in itself, so you’re like, “I'm here now, and I'm anxious to hear the song” or “I wanna hear what the DJs gonna bring to us.” EMMA WARREN Certainly, the energy levels I've seen in dubstep clubs this past year have been higher than anything I've seen for quite a long time. What's it like for you? BENGA Well, for some of you who might not know, when I play, the energy levels are crazy to the point where people are wheeling up my tunes for me, I don't even wheel them up myself anymore. Tunes like
"Spongebob". I would say, it's not just only new people getting into the music, but it's where the music's going, like really dancefloor and really ravey. EMMA WARREN Most people won't have heard "Spongebob,” can you describe it? BENGA I can play it. EMMA WARREN A burst of "Spongebob" would be the best way to illustrate what we're talking about. I was telling some of the American guys that we’ve got here about the wheel, that if a tune at a dubstep rave is especially good, instead of shouting for a wheel or a pull-up, they'll literally lean over and pull it up themselves. And they said, ”If someone did that to me, I'd punch them in the face.“ What do you do when someone wheels up one of your tunes, Benga? BENGA Clap! [laughs] (music: Coki – “Spongebob”/applause) EMMA WARREN So that's "Spongebob" by Coki. What did you think when you first heard that? BENGA I thought it's a really uncontrolled bassline. It's mental. That’s his personality in his record, I reckon. EMMA WARREN We talked a bit about the competitive energy that helped propel dubstep forward, and make it really interesting. There are some other records with that mad Coki energy in them. Are there some producers there that are engaged in what you might call a weird-off? Trying to out-weird each other? BENGA [laughs] It's more like if another producer comes to the club and sees the reaction that Spongebob got, you go home and try and get that same energy. EMMA WARREN Yeah, I suppose there was one period where everyone was engaged in sort of a wobble-off. Now they're in a weird-off. Who knows what will come next, maybe a 'melody-off’, I don't know. BENGA But saying that, I was in New Zealand and I heard one of the radio jingles and they called me “Benga, Wobble Warrior,” [laughs] Is that what I've come to? EMMA WARREN But your album that's coming out is called Diary Of An Afro Warrior, right? BENGA Which all makes sense looking at my appearance, ha ha! I think it's more
about my appearance than the actual music. EMMA WARREN We're quite lucky because Benga's going to play us something from the new album. And I thought there's quite a few different styles. Sure, you might be the wobble king here and the weird-off king there, but at the same time, there's loads of other styles that are coming out on the album. You've come up with
some stuff that people wouldn't expect from you, basically, which I think is really hard when you're known for a particular sound. So we're going to listen to two tracks - first "26 Basslines", which is not what you'd expect in a negative way, but not in the vein of these records that you've already heard. And then we're going to hear something else, which takes something of a beautiful swerve, but we'll see. (music: Benga – “26 Basslines”/applause) EMMA WARREN So there we go, we've given the speakers a bit of a workout, getting them warmed up. How important is the sound system to a dubstep DJ? BENGA Big. The songs ain't as full as drum & bass, there's no breaks, so you need the bassline pressure to understand dubstep. There's not loads of melodies going through the songs, it's more about the bassline, so it all makes sense to have a massive system. EMMA WARREN ’Cause there's a big difference between how you'd hear it cold on a normal system or even worse through your laptop speakers, and what you're hearing properly. It's probably two-thirds of the record, it's like an iceberg most of it's underwater and you're not going to get it unless you're hearing it properly. What sort of sound system do you really like to play on? BENGA Well, I can tell you a few clubs that I think has the system correct.
FWD, which is in
Plastic People in London and happens on a Friday. EMMA WARREN There’s a big wobbly bass wall. One of the walls on the side has turned into a big wall of bass. BENGA It's more that that system... No matter how they've got it, it's just correct. Most of the music you hear inside there is perfect. But you do get that rattling wall. EMMA WARREN Where else? BENGA DMZ. They've got a system
at Mass in Brixton. There's other systems like in Leeds, Iration
Steppas. EMMA WARREN I was going to ask you about Iration Steppas. The first night I went to DMZ was the Nexus night in Leeds. It's in the West Indian Centre in Chapeltown, a small area of Leeds. I walked past the speaker stack and thought if I was actually three stone lighter, I would have been knocked over by that. It's very, very, very powerful. And you know that bass tone rattle you get underneath your ribcage? You also get it behind your cheekbones. It's really incredibly powerful. What's it like to DJ there? BENGA Well, I'm behind the decks where the system's not hitting me as hard, but
it's still hitting me hard, and I actually feel sorry for people, ’cause it feels like I'm gonna be sick constantly. But if you like that sort of thing, Leeds is your place, everyone. EMMA WARREN I was talking to someone who had gone to DMZ, and they had a bit of a problem with their knee, they had water on their knee, and they were on crutches. But they really wanted to go, but they had to leave after ten minutes because it was wobbling all the water in their knee. [laughs] BENGA I can see that as well. EMMA WARREN Yeah, because if you look at the pint glasses, you can see the waves in the pint glasses. Wherever there's water, it's moving. BENGA The vibrations are nuts. Even your feet! I think the bassline helps to get you dancing because you're just shaking from the bass. I dunno, it just starts off something. EMMA WARREN It definitely does seem to get people in the zone. I think at some point we should get some psychological acoustic person down to DMZ and get them to work out what it's doing to people because it really does seem to have quite a strong effect on people. BENGA Definitely. Even myself, even the really slow half-step, you can tell it's 70 BPMs sort of thing. The bassline just gets me moving because of the frequencies and the rattle in your body. EMMA WARREN Obviously, people are getting into that zone. The internet is spreading it far and wide. Traditionally, when scenes have exploded like this, there's been a bit of a time lag, like something happening in New York or London or Berlin or wherever, and it sort of spreads rather slowly. But this [spread] is happening pretty much at the same time as it's happening in London, hasn't it?
When you've been traveling around and about, are you finding that people are having the same kind of responses to records as they are in London? BENGA Yeah, I always say, I get somewhere, and they'll ask me for something
like "26 Basslines,” and I'll think, “How do you know?: But it all comes down to the internet. The internet spreads things at like four times the speed and makes everything just so accessible. EMMA WARREN How about we listen to one of the other songs that show another side to what you're expressing? Can we do that? BENGA Yeah, of course. (music: Benga – “Loose Synths”/applause) EMMA WARREN Where did that come from? Croydon? BENGA [laughs] Would I sound a bit of a weasel if I said from the heart? EMMA WARREN There's nothing weasel-ish about saying from the heart. There's something heartfelt about it. I mean, when I first heard that, I thought it sounded really beautiful. BENGA [laughs] Now you're putting me on the spot. People are so used to so much, like wobblers … they don't know that I do actually listen to music. If you listen to all the stuff I played you before, there's nothing in it, nothing to say that I listen to music. It just sounds more like I'm in a science lab, mixing chemicals to make those basslines. No chords involved or keys or nothing. I'm not saying I'm a specialist of chords or keys, but I do know a little bit. EMMA WARREN So what's the musical side of your music? What do you listen to that's musical? BENGA Right, this shout out is going out to my... dunno. I can't think of the word, but I'm just gonna say his name: Michael Jackson. [laughs/claps] I listen to
different types of music, but as I was saying to people before, I couldn't really put a pinpoint or tell you names of people ’cause I just turn on TV or the radio and just listen to music, listen to what they got. EMMA WARREN I think we've got to talk a minute about Michael Jackson. What are the songs coming into your mind? BENGA Loads! I even watched the film Moonwalker the other day. I'm gonna sing it to you, ’cause I don't know the names. [sings Michael Jackson
"Leave Me Alone"/laughs] Does anyone know that song? Everything that he
writes, even though sometimes you don't know what he's saying, ’cause
sometimes he makes up words and stuff, but the music is bad. Quincy Jones, he's another producer who's wicked. It's inspiring to hear what they done with what they had back then. Even before that. EMMA WARREN Is there anyone else like Michael Jackson that you love? BENGA Yeah, Stevie Wonder. He's big. Loads of names, but I can't put ’em down when I'm on the spot. I feel blank. EMMA WARREN Maybe what we should do is perhaps listen to something on the album that's tapping into your more musical side. Can we have the last track that's on the album? BENGA Yeah, it's on there... technical. EMMA WARREN You might have to do that. (music: Benga – “Zero M2”/applause) I think we have to let the music talk for itself. BENGA Please don't ask me any questions about where that came from. EMMA WARREN Of course, I won't! [laughs] It's quite obvious the music does all the talking there really, doesn't it? Have you played that out? BENGA Yeah, it's normally my intro. I think you have that bit in the middle where it goes into the bassline part just for DJs. EMMA WARREN So I want to talk a bit about how you started making music. We should rewind a bit. There is another thing that I wanted to play from the album, but we can talk about that in a bit. How did you first start? BENGA I was a DJ before I started producing. I went to see another dubstep DJ called Hatcha,
and he had so many songs that I couldn't get, that I couldn't go to the shop and say, ”Do you have this and that?“, because they weren't out. And it's made me want to make my own music and have songs that other people couldn't have as
well. I got home and it's taken a while to get what I could start making music with, and there was the solution of Music on the Playstation. EMMA WARREN That's Music 2000? BENGA That's Music 2000. I think they had one before that, but that was the one where I started putting things onto minidisc, and taking it down to the shop. EMMA WARREN I think people used to think it was a joke, or not a real thing, that people making your kind of music did actually use the PlayStation to make their tunes, but you really did, didn't you? BENGA Well, I never released a tune that was out of my PlayStation, but So
Solid, I think people know who
they are... EMMA WARREN So Solid Crew. BENGA They released a few songs from their Playstation. I'm not sure about "21
Seconds",but "Dilemma" [was], which is a So
Solid record. Romeo done a song called "Oh No", which came out on... label's racking my brain, but... There was so many other things around at that time. Like, even "Pulse X", which was a big grime record, that came off a Playstation. EMMA WARREN What can you do with those things? Do you have to push yourself to do
anything good because you're making stuff on a PlayStation? Or does it make things easy, just because it's what you got, and you can do what you want with
it? BENGA Well, to come up with anything that could even be released was really hard. Obviously, the sound, and you have eight seconds sampling time, things like that where you have to put a CD into your PlayStation and hit record for eight seconds. But other than that, the sounds were just claps and basic things, so
to come up with anything good meant loads of layering and stuff like that. EMMA WARREN I guess using pretty shitty stuff like that makes you be good. It's like learning to DJ on really terrible equipment, it elevates your skill quite quickly. BENGA Hmmm, you almost learn little things like layering and how to make things
sound a lot better. When you get onto other programs, you obviously don't take a lot from the Music 2000, but yeah, it does help. EMMA WARREN One thing that might not be clear to people is just quite how much experience you've got under your belt at only 21. How old were you when you first started
making dubstep or first started making music? BENGA I was 12 coming on 13, so... EMMA WARREN And how old were you when you first went to FWD to heard Hatcha playing your record? BENGA I would've been about 14, ’cause my first record came out when I was 15, and back then, songs circulated on dubplate for about a year. So yeah, I was about 14. EMMA WARREN So you're 14, you're getting your music being played out. You're almost being chaperoned to FWD so you can hear your record, and then you got to go home again. What were you doing? Were you going to school and then going to the record shop after school? What were you doing? BENGA I hope none of my teachers sees this, but I just didn't turn up to school sometimes. I went into the record store - well, I'd take my clothes in a spare bag, and then change and go in there and act like I had a day off. I think after the first seven times in a week they were thinking, “Hold on a minute, you don't have seven days off or seven bank holidays,” so they kind of clocked. I think when you're at that age, you have to make your own decisions. I'm not saying you have to be really responsible, people can't tell you what to do at that age, so you have to start making up your own mind. EMMA WARREN So at that age, at 14, did you know that music was something that was for you? Did you know really strongly that this was something you wanted to follow full-on? BENGA Yeah, I made a decision. I did play football while I was making music and it was more I couldn't do both. I know people who can do both, but I'm one of these people who has to concentrate on one thing. EMMA WARREN So you're saying a bit of football, but it wasn't just a bit of football, was it? You were playing for the Arsenal youth team. BENGA Yeah, I was at YTS level, but I was playing with Steven Sidwell. Well, he played for Reading, ’cause he left Arsenal because there wasn't much chance of him playing a first team game. And at that time, I was still 13. They had a lot of internationals, so for me to still be there, they hadn't said anything about my place. I mean I was OK, but I just made that decision. Music appealed to me more, I could get home and make music and not wanna move, but then I couldn't go outside and practice with a football and not get bored, you know? EMMA WARREN So basically, just to put it in context, you potentially had a professional football career in front of you, you were at a point where that was a distinct possibility. But you made a decision that music was what you were going to put all your effort into. BENGA Yeah, like I said before, it appealed to me more. I could sit there for hours and hours making music, wake up, still be in the same clothes and make
music. EMMA WARREN So during this period, you and Skream were knocking about a lot down at Big Apple record shop, and I
understand the pair of you used to go upstairs with Arthur
Smith and Danny
Harrison, who have recorded as
Menta and D'n'D amongst other things.
So what was that like? BENGA When I first heard their records and the things they had done, they'd made loads of popular records at that time. They made "Gotta Get Thru This" with Daniel Beddingfield, they
helped on a lot of Ms. Dynamite tracks. Even at the moment, they're working on a Jennifer Lopez remix. They're constantly doing big records but then I was like star-struck. Anything they told me got through to me. I'm not sure there was a lot of other people who would have been able to do that. Telling me to keep doing this and keep doing that, and I would actually keep doing it because I could see what they was doing, and I wanted to get to that stage. So yeah, it was a big part of my life as well. EMMA WARREN So can you paint us a picture about what that was like? What would you do? What happened? BENGA Go up the stairs, Arthur would see me. He'd stop what he was doing and he would start getting out the keyboards. He had I think it was a Nord Lead, a
number 3, and he'd say things to me, like, "If you keep making music, one day you'll get a keyboard like this," ’cause I was still on Playstation then. Don't know if it leaves much to your imagination. EMMA WARREN Were you sitting in there while they were making their records, Menta Records or the D’n’D stuff, or were you there in the downtime? BENGA There were times when I would come in and they'd be in the middle of a
mixdown, but I never really saw them play riffs, not sure if they were hiding what they'd done from me. But I saw them on their Allen & Heath desk. I saw them mix and picked up little things like EQing and that. EMMA WARREN I suppose there's two things there. One is having that insight into how
studios work and how they do things for you, and also that must have given you a big sense of connection with the music when you were hearing it out and about knowing that you’d been there somehow. BENGA Yeah, when you hit the age when you're going out and doing underage drinking and clubbing, you start off in the clubs where you hear the big music. Every time I'd hear a song
and I'd think to myself, "I can hear how it's produced:, from quite young, you know? I could see what he's done to do this and do that, and I could go home and learn how he'd done that. EMMA WARREN When Skream was here last year, he talked about how when he first started making records, he was trying to do his version of
El-B. He was trying to make dark
garage, he started by almost copying it, and then that helped develop his own style. Did you do something similar? BENGA Yeah, I was on the same sort of thing, but I didn't really go for the same people. I was more into the Wookie side of
things and the Bingo side, the breaker sort of things, but I just couldn't make it. But then, when we were making the songs and giving them to Hatcha, what we were making was quite different, trying to get to that stage. He started playing it, so instead of copying fully we went down our own route. EMMA WARREN We definitely want to hear some of your early stuff, like "Judgement", but before that can we hear a bit of Wookie, please? I think it would illuminate a really key musical influence on you as a musician, and also Wookie said something to you, didn't he? BENGA It was like you'll probably hear some of the sounds he was using back then that are
in my music now. (music: Wookie - unknown) EMMA WARREN Wookie's sound was really tough, but really musical at the same time. Is that what appealed to you about it? BENGA Yeah, also the way the beats were so broken. They weren't on any sort of step. And there’s a darkness as well. He had such good musical knowledge and darkness as well. EMMA WARREN So moving on a little bit from something that influenced you, to something that you made. Obviously, the first track that really got your name was "The Judgement," but what was one of the first tracks that you made that really felt madly happy with? BENGA Probably, only the thing I made three days ago. [laughs] EMMA WARREN Which we're going to hear right at the very end, aren't we? BENGA I can't really ever say that I'm madly happy with a song, but there are things I thought I did well, and pat myself on the back. You never sit there and straight afterward think, “Yeah, that's the one.” It's more when you hear it out and you hear it somewhere else and it sits right, then you think, “I’ve
done a good job.” EMMA WARREN So can we have "Judgement"? (music: Benga & Skream – “Judgement”/ applause) So that's you and Skream. How old were you then? BENGA Well, when we first made it, we were both 15 [laughs]. I hate talking about my age, ’cause I always lie. Everyone, ”I'm 25! I'm 25,” everyone! EMMA WARREN What were you two like in the studio together when you were 15? BENGA Kids eating chicken, getting grubby fingers on our keyboards and that. I
dunno, we hardly ever got things finished. We were just so playful and just couldn't do anything except talk about the things we'd been doing beforehand. That was about one of the only ones we got finished together around that time. I think I was 15 when that came out, ’cause it was one of the quicker ones to be released. EMMA WARREN And what was that like for you? BENGA Apart from going into school telling people I had releases and had been in magazines, and everyone would be like, "Yeah, whatever. How come we ain't seen you
on Top Of The Pops yet?“ ”’Cause it ain't that type of music.“ EMMA WARREN So what was the progression? After "The Judgement" came out, what was happening to you? Were you starting to DJ, were you starting to produce more? Were you seeing it as something you were really gonna do? BENGA It was more there wasn't a lot of sales or money in dubstep. There wasn't a lot of bookings, so I made other things as well. I made house music. Well, I joined Arthur making house music, and I also worked with a guy called John P,
we made electro house. I never stopped making dubstep, don't get me wrong. But I made other music, and I learned a lot more about music and different tempos and drum patterns and stuff. EMMA WARREN So what was the house stuff you were making? BENGA Can we keep it a secret? Do you mind if I keep it a secret? EMMA WARREN Well, it won't be much of a secret if you tell everyone here. BENGA Can we move on? EMMA WARREN So it's quite interesting, really. Obviously, you don't have to talk about the secrets, but you have got some musical secrets, haven't you? So, we're not going to talk about them ’cause it's good to have secrets. But what do you like about having musical secrets? Secret musical personas, maybe? BENGA I do have aliases, but it's not that I'm not happy with the music, but I'd rather just keep it down low. I did learn a lot from making that kind of music. I learned a lot about edits, production, ’cause obviously, when I was making dubstep then you can hear the beats were quite thin. I knew a bit about layering, but how to layer and not fill up space. So it was good to make some other music. EMMA WARREN I suppose, it would be an interesting point to talk about your DJ style. Because obviously, you're being booked a lot, and as a DJ to watch you're really interesting ’cause you're really live when you play, aren't you? You're not some guy standing still playing the records, it's like you're almost
physically connected to them. You move around quite a lot. How would you describe your DJ style? BENGA Bit erratic, really. I'm gonna show you a few of my cases and what they're like just because of how quickly I try and mix and get my records back in my sleeves. Maybe I might be in luck, ’cause some of the record cases aren't so bad because they're quite new. But I say this is new, it's a couple of weeks old. But that’s what it looks like. [shows record sleeve to audience] EMMA WARREN I think the bit you need to see is this bit [shows sleeve opening, all
battered and worn]. BENGA You're exposing me. You're into this exposing me bit, aren't you? EMMA WARREN This is not about exposing you. We just want to get into your mind a little bit. The bits you want to share with us, we're very happy to be party to. BENGA I'm gonna hold this up. [laughs/lifts ripped and tattered record sleeve] EMMA WARREN So where did you hone your DJ style? Where did you become the DJ that you are now? BENGA It sounds funny when I say this or big-headed, but I thought, once I was 13, I thought I'd mastered it. I was backlashing, scratching and
stuff. It was back then really I learned how to DJ. With DJing now, I'm really quick cueing up. I almost put the record on and cue it from anywhere and find the tempo and then find the first 16 [bars] after that. But then I learned that when I was really young. So when I stopped DJing and went more in the studio,
as soon as I got back into it, it's like riding a bike. You don't forget how to do it, you just get a little bit rusty. So I was back in the little pubs and at my friend's house and taking my decks ’round to parties back in the days when I learned how to DJ. EMMA WARREN So you just had decks in your room from when you were 12, 13? BENGA Yeah, I think the first decks I actually got were Technics. I got ’em for my 12th birthday! EMMA WARREN So you're the guy who's just sitting in the bedroom for hours and hours
working out how to do it, and then just annoying your neighbors? BENGA Yeah, I must have so many enemies. My next door neighbor must be my arch enemy. That, and kicking my football into her garden. They moved out shortly. EMMA WARREN If you've got teenage neighbors, you've either got the footballing ones, who kick the football over, or you've got the DJ who's there all hours of the night, making a lot of racket. All you hear is “wooom wooom woooom,” and you did both. BENGA Innit? They wanted to murder me after a while. No hellos, no byes. They'd be kicking my footballs back and they'd be burst. Or saying, "Do you know how loud your music is?" And I'd be like naive saying, "Oh? No, sorry!" EMMA WARREN Which are the DJs you like watching? BENGA I watched Skream for a while, now I’m kind of bored with him. Joke, joke! That doesn’t go anywhere but here. There’s Hatcha, he’s on the same sort of quick tip. There’s N-Type, these are
all dubstep DJs by the way. There’s
Mala, Loefah, there’s a few. Outside of
dubstep, there’s Derrick May. EMMA WARREN What do you really like to see in a DJ? Is it speed, is it selection? BENGA It’s hard, really, because selection’s got a lot to do with the crowd. Obviously, I know a lot of DJs that play for themselves and try to bring across their vibe. But what is a DJ without bringing a party as well? I see certain other DJs, it doesn’t what kind of music you play, but I reckon as a DJ, you should always bring energy. I’ve seen other DJs they’re not making people move. And if you come to a rave, you come to dance and have a good time. I say people like N-Type and Hatcha because their energy that they bring, the way they put records in really quickly, rewinds and stuff. EMMA WARREN Didn’t N-Type got 40 tracks onto his dubstep single CD? BENGA Yeah, if you calculate, it's not even like two minutes per track, is it? EMMA WARREN There's a lot of 58 seconds. BENGA Yeah, that's the sort of thing I like to see. Dunno about everyone else, but that's the one. EMMA WARREN Do you think it's possible to be a dubstep DJ in the bigger sense of the word if you're not a producer as well? BENGA Well, N-Type and Hatcha are the proof of it, but it is really hard. I think you have to make your own music, even just because a lot of the producers now try and hold their tunes back, and that's what people want to hear. They want to hear fresh music. They don't wanna hear everything they could buy from the
shop. EMMA WARREN Well, this might be a nice moment to listen to a couple of tracks that have been doing that for the last year or 18 months or so. We talked about playing
maybe "Evolution" or "Flame", maybe? Would you like to select one of those? BENGA Before I play this, before this came about there was no dubstep with this
sort of vibe. The percussion was all seventy [BPM], there was no garage vibe from it, there was no 140 vibe from it. But when this came about, it created the sense that it doesn't all have to be straight, kick on the first, snare on the third. EMMA WARREN So before you press play, what's this that you're talking about? BENGA Almost like a soca vibe. EMMA WARREN What's it called? BENGA Oh, my bad. This is called "Flame", off the Big Apple EP. EMMA WARREN You just mentioned the word soca. Can you expand on that at all? BENGA It's more the drum pattern, the energy and the way it flows. I couldn’t explain to you why that comes to mind. EMMA WARREN OK. Well, let's let the music do the talking again and press play. (music: Benga – “Flame”/applause) Emma Warren One of the big ways that dubstep has gone through this expansion is because of radio shows. A lot of people have radio shows, and a lot of the radio shows are highly entertaining and really essential to listen to. Why don't you have a radio show? BENGA It brings it back ’cause I like the fact that people have to come to the
raves to hear the music. I like the way it keeps it exclusive. I think that is the only reason I don't have a radio show. EMMA WARREN Which of the radio shows do you listen to or do you like? BENGA Well, sometimes I listen to N-Type's show. Just ’cause he's crazy. Skream, he's another one. He makes so much fresh music. He's still on that vibe where he makes ten songs a week. So I have to listen to him to know what he's doing. I think those are the only two shows I listen to, except from Hatcha, he's on
Kiss, so you can pick that up wherever you are. EMMA WARREN You were involved in an epic 4-hour version of Skream's show Stellar
Sessions, which is on Rinse at 9-11 on a Wednesday. Can you tell us something about that? BENGA I think it was someone's leaving party, but the whole idea was to get me and a few of Skream’s other friends, Pokes, he's from
DMZ. We had LD who works at
Transition, he cuts dubplates. We also had Geeneus, he makes house. We had a
few others down but the whole purpose was that we all bring our new stuff and play three songs each. It kinda got a bit over the top, ’cause we had beer and dubplates about and spilled beer on dubplates and a lot of nightmares after that. But there's not more I can add to that, really. We got down there,
and it turned into a bit of a massacre and we played a lot of new music. EMMA WARREN I seem to remember Chef playing
"Ghost Town" by The Specials, so yeah. There was all sorts going on. What I thought was interesting about it, despite it being a brilliant bit of radio and thoroughly entertaining, well worth staying up for, that obviously a big part of dubstep is good times, you
know? People having a laugh and having a lot of fun. But somehow, probably because of the radio shows and the internet, us as fans, I suppose, we're a little bit party to what's going on. We have a bit of a sense of what's you're doing. ’Cause you're about at the raves as well, you know? You go to DMZ, there's Benga in the corner, there's Walsh in the middle of the dance floor, there's Chef over here. All the people who's records you're buying and radio shows you're listening to are out there and you're all approachable people. Do you think that helps add to the amounts of fun that people seem to be having when they're going out and listening to it? BENGA I think, sometimes, people as artists come across a bit like it's work, but hearing the music and playing the music isn’t really work to us. We have a lot of fun, and everyone knows each other. I don't think we'll ever get to the
stage where we're gonna be like, “Oh, we're too good for other people.” People like to interact with the artists. EMMA WARREN Now you're gonna play one of your older records, then we'll talk a bit, and then you're going to play us something super double triple fresh, literally three days old. So you'll give a little blast of "Evolution"? BENGA Yeah, two secs [Benga unfolds the sleeve]. EMMA WARREN [laughs] Is that the special book version? (music: Benga – “Evolution”/applause) BENGA It's jumping too much. EMMA WARREN I like the fact that you're all big sound people, and your dubs are all
fucked. BENGA [laughs] Does that show my personality? ’Cause it's not that at all. Emma Warren They are well used aren't they? One thing I did want to touch on a little bit was we haven't heard a particular example of this. But you know when people have taken reggae vocals and done stuff with them on dubstep records, you've done a couple of things that do that. I wondered what sort of... If there's been any reaction from Jamaican artists or the reggae scene and what they're making of it? Benga I think there’s a big hype around dubstep, and theres been things that i dont think certain artists really like dubstep but they get involved. There are a lot of artists as well, let's say like Baby Sham, he likes the thing that... I didn't even do the bootleg. I think everyone knows what it means, I don't need to explain. Emma Warren Do you want to tell us what the record is you're talking about? Benga The record I'm talking about is... Let me start again, getting tongue tied. The Baby Sham vocal is "I Remember Those Days" and the record of mine that was used was "World War 7" off New Step. I didn't do the bootleg, but I just heard it and I don't know how it got back to Baby Sham either but they wanted it to come out officially but I never got around to it. Emma Warren So why didn't it come out officially? Benga Mixdown reasons and having to bring back an old piece of vinyl. We didn't really want to do that. Emma Warren What about generally in Jamaica, are people feeling dubstep? Benga I couldn't really tell you. Say, there's this artist or that artist , but I have had a few things on MySpace where an artist will come to me and say, "I like dubstep, I'm feelin what you do, can we get on the remix or make something?" Emma Warren In terms of your musical background, are you connected to reggae? Obviously, because the reggae side of it is really important in dubstep. But personally is that something that you grew up with? Benga Not really. I'm Nigerian so I never really listened to a lot of Nigerian music but then reggae wasn't a big part of my life. More like rave music, hardcore was more part of my life. But there are a lot of people like Mala that was reggae-influenced, Coki is reggae influenced. So it's really never come out a lot in my music. More when I work with someone. Emma Warren I know some of the people who are a bit older than you in dubstep, Loefah for example, when he was 14 he was going raving at Labyrinth in Dalston and was the real young one in that scene. Then he kind of moved on to jungle and got really into Metalheadz and stuff like that. But what about for you? How were you experiencing hardcore and that side of stuff? Benga Pirate radio. As I said before, I didn't really go on the Internet and search for artists and stuff. I would just pick up a radio station and just listen to it all day, that sort of thing. Emma Warren Like what? Benga Oooh. Passion. Certain radio stations that I never knew the name of, I just knew the frequency. Emma Warren Pirate radio has always done that job, hasn't it really? It's like broadcasting through the frquencies that you wouldn't otherwise hear. I think for a lot of people, especially in the UK, pirate radio has been one of the reasons why the UK has kept on reinventing dance music. And kept on coming up with these mad, new hybrids. Dubstep, you know, being one of those. Hmmm... [laughs] I just reached a conversational full stop then, sorry. Just a couple more questions, really. The people who are making it in dubstep are finally - hallelujah - making some money. They're busy all the time, they're flying off to three different countries every week. Skream's attracting pop attention, he's remixed the Klaxons and whatever. What's that doing to the scene? People are getting stretched pretty thin, they're having to run their own businesses, they’re partying a lot, making lots of music, and playing out everywhere. What effect is that having? BENGA It is quite tiring. But I think in any music scene, it's survival of the fittest. You can't complain that you're being flown about, you just got to get on with it. It's not like you get to the airport and you don't know what you're doing, it's all set out for you, so... You don't rest and stuff, but it is tiring and it is a lot of hard work and stuff. But I couldn't speak for Mala, who runs his own label, runs his own night, has to make tunes, he flies about a lot. Couldn't speak for those. I work for a label called Tempa
and the only thing I do is DJ and produce. EMMA WARREN And just mentioning how some people are doing remixes for the pop world, or the outside world, I suppose, which other artists would you like to work with or are likely to work with? BENGA I think my next project will be with Cya. It's just one of those things where I listen to something else and I think that could fit. I've not really done a lot of remixes where I think they've approached me and I've sat down and thought, “This is gonna make me a lot of money, I should do it.” I've more thought about whether it would work. I don't want it to get to the stage where I'm making loads of tunes I don't even like. I never want to get to that stage. I think a lot of producers are like that. If you listen to Skream’s Klaxon remix, it's not like it's some big pop record. It's not like some big pop record, so all the music we do keep the same vibe. EMMA WARREN Yes, it does seem like people are still and will probably carry on doing stuff because they actually really want to, and that's one of the reasons why the music's so interesting. So, before we wrap up are you going to bless us with something special? BENGA Yeah, let's do it. EMMA WARREN Go on. What is it first? BENGA Well, I haven't really got a name for it, ’cause usually, when I make a name I just look around my room or where I am and call it whatever's there. So I got tunes by the name of "Ketchup,” “Chicken", "Nescafe", "Bedspread". Just ’cause I'm so out of names after 700 tracks. EMMA WARREN So you're like the Keyser Soze of dubstep naming stuff after stuff you can see. BENGA Whatever. Let's just hope there's nothing we can see that... Let's not go down that route. Let's just play the record. (music: Benga – “Benga’s Off His Head”/applause) Emma Warren Thank you. I think what we need to do now is open it up to everyone else. I'm sure there will be someone with some questions. Have we got a microphone? Audience Member You said, and Emma brought this up before, that you didn't really grow up with reggae, or with Carribean music. But there is a really strong soca feel in a lot of the tracks you've played. Are you going back and checking out that stuff now? Or are you just getting that influence all from it being filtered through dubstep. Benga To be fair, I say soca cause it wasn't something I listened to a lot. It just came about. That's how I brought my energy to my songs, that's the sort of riff that appealed to me. I never really heard it and thought, "that's what I'm going to bring to my music." Emma Warren Actually I've got an additional question there, was there any Nigerian music that you grew up with in your family or just around you generally? Benga No. I think my mom wasn't really like a musical person, neither was my dad. So I never really got any influence from what they played. I just went to school and picked up what everyone else was listening to. I would listen to 2 Unlimited even, pop music, I liked Britney Spears when I was younger. Audience Member Do you have any of those PlayStation tunes with you? Benga I would love to say yes but, but because I was recording them to a MiniDisc, you see how battered my records get, MiniDiscs just got destroyed. No, sorry. Audience Member But did you bring any of your house records? Benga My house records. [laughs] They are secret, so they're hidden in the basement. Audience Member I was wondering cause you never really mentioned it, if you can talk about the Magnetic Man project and stuff like that? 'Cause that's kinda exciting. Benga Alright. Magnetic Man was my pal. He kind of got really paranoid and doesn't come out of his house much, so we decided to take it over for him and do his live shows. But he's a really good musician and we're thinking of doing live shows, as in we're going to have Abletons and have bongo players and a few singers. We are trying to work it so it can be a festival thing. Emma Warren That's definitely something we should all go and check if we have the opportunity to. Thank you. Any more? Benga Go on, Jabber. Audience Member Hello. Bass is definitely an important part of your music and your sound, how do you do to have this so big bass sound? Benga What instruments do I use and stuff? Audience Member No, like, technically speaking, to have such a huge sounding bass. Benga I think I just got along as it's gotten more and more apparent that bass is the main part of any music. Maybe not in a few genres but in most of the genres I listen to bass is a big thing. So it's always trying to get energy, and the bassline to cut through. Apart from what I'm using, I use an Albino. I use a small plugin called Audio PHA, I think it is. A few other things. Emma Warren If people wanted to make their basslines bigger and badder, and rougher and tougher, even, what would be your one bit of advice without necessarily giving away your own little personal tricks? What would be your one bit of advice to people who want to make their basslines big? Benga Make them loud. [laughs] Emma Warren Keeping it simple. Make it loud everyone. Anymore questions? Audience Member Let's suppose you're playing out, you play some tune that clears the floor, what is the first tune you play afterwards to get everybody back and maybe you have it with you? Benga OK. I'll have a look through. Not sure if I make music that clears dance floors but... Emma Warren Maybe someone else has cleared the dancefloor. What is your one tune to bring them back? Benga Dunno. I've got something by Coki I think maybe here that always gets the crowds coming back. [looks through record bag] Sorry one sec. The tune I had in mind I didn't bring with me, but I've got something else that might work sometimes. (music: Benga - Unknown) Emma Warren Yeah Coki is really killing it, isn't he?? Benga That's not him. That's me. Emma Warren Oh, I thought you were doing a new Coki thing. Blusherama. Benga No, the thing I was going to play was the Coki thing, it's got a Movado vocal on it but the reason why I say this brings the crowd back is because they expect me to play something else, so I play a few tunes that ain't all about distorted basslines. That'll warm them up and get them going and then go back to my wobblers. Emma Warren Any other questions? Audience Member Because you're obviously at the top of your class in the dubstep genre, is there a threat to your credibility if you were to do a remix for a pop artist? Benga Not really, it's more how I choose the records that I do, because if the song sounded good to me and I thought that I could do something that works with what I do, then I can't see any reason why what the artist, or what they do, should stop what I'm doing, or make me have a bad name. I'll do whatever as long as it sounds good to me. Emma Warren Anything else. Audience Member You mentioned Stevie Wonder, what's a particular time of Stevie Wonder? The Motown years or the '70s stuff? Benga I think the CD I have at home, or one of the CDs I have at home, is just his greatest hits, really. So I couldn't pick out times of songs when they came about. But even things like "Isn't She Lovely," and things like that, everyone knows that song, but they are big tunes. They are written well, they're catchy. So, no time, sorry. Emma Warren Have we got any more before we hit lunch? Another new track? Benga OK. (music: Benga - "Pleasure" / applause) Emma Warren Giving pleasure to bassheads, giving pleasure to house heads, thank you very much Benga! [applause] Benga Thank you!

---

Title: Bun B
Date: 2015-04-20
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/bun-b-grinder-country

Bun B
Happy to take on a father figure role for the many rappers in and around his beloved Port Arthur, Texas, rapper Bun B has taken more hits than a heavyweight in a career spanning more than 30 years. Despite that, he has never failed to be anything other than a true statesman for Southern hip-hop: a walking advertisement for his hometown and for rap’s ability to enact change in society. As one half of UGK, AKA Underground Kingz, Bun left an indelible mark on rap, and following the tragic death of his partner Pimp C he has continued to work and raise a new generation.
In his lecture at the 2008 Red Bull Music Academy, the trill OG recounted his beginnings in Port Arthur, the lessons from UGK and why caring will always beat hating.
Hosted by Davide Bortot Bun B is from Port Arthur in Texas, which is a 90-minute ride from Houston. He is part of a group called UGK who released their first [EP] 20 years ago, in 1988, called The Southern Way. They had their first number one record last year, almost 20 years later, which for hip-hop is a
ridiculous time span, and he is still around – so give it up one more time for
Bun B. (Applause) Bun B Thank you again for having me, thank you. Davide Bortot So when Chuck D
was on this couch this morning, he called you an “analog person.” Would you agree with that? Bun B Absolutely. Chuck D would understand, I come from the age of recording on
2” reels, before ProTools and Digital Performer and all these things
came into play. Recording back then, in the early days – one, it was more
time-consuming. For example, if I had to redo a vocal take, you would
have to stop the machine, wait for the tapes to rewind, wait for all the
tracks to lock back in and then go again, whereas digitally it is two taps of
the space bar. That being said, a lot of the people who came into the music
industry working on 2” reels, they have a better understanding of how music
and vocals laid to tape have a little bit deeper and a little bit
warmer sound than the digital sound. It is really a personal preference. I
can do both and I have done both, but with the UGK records we always try and
bring everything to the 2” reel, because if you are a DJ — and we have a couple of DJs
in the house, [to participant] you did a great job last night, by the way —
sometimes you have records and some of them just hit so much harder than the
other records and, really, it has a lot to do not just with the mixing and
mastering but the actual recording process. Davide Bortot So I think we will have to talk about the special sound that you introduced to the game later, but first of all, Port Arthur. I don’t think many
people are familiar with this place, so would you break it down? Bun B Port Arthur, Texas, is a very small refinery town in south-east Texas. The
town next to it, Beaumont, Texas, is where the largest oil drilling in the world has ever
happened. I think at its peak it was releasing 100,000 gallons of oil a day. The whole
area of the city that I come from, Port Arthur and the neighbouring towns, was all built off of the refinery, so if you don’t
work in the refinery, you don’t have a good job in that area. There are only
50,000 people in the whole town, only two high schools, three elementaries, so
everybody knows everybody. There’s not too much anonymity in Port Arthur, Texas. Not many rich people in Port Arthur, Texas. When I
say rich – rich in a small town like that would be someone with six figures.
Most people who live and work in Port Arthur probably don’t make more than $35,000 a year. So there is not necessarily poverty, but most people in the
town are just getting by. My mother was a nurse, my father was a janitor, so
no big crazy house for me — small house, small bedroom but big love. When
you’re from a small town or a small village or whatever it is, you have a
deeper sense of community with people, you don’t make fair weather friends.
Most of the friends that I have will probably be my friends for the rest
of my life. You don’t have to worry about personalities changing, you pretty
much know how everybody is. Because of where I, and my partner, Pimp
C, were raised, in the small town, it
affected the way we communicated with the world, not just musically but
personally. We wanted to make sure that people understood that we were always
a group that never wanted to put a wall up between the people that listen to
their music, because there was no walls where we came from. Everybody knew
everybody, we could just be sitting in the living room and somebody would just
walk up and come in the screen door and say, “Wassup man, what are y’all doing
over here?” So we wanted to make sure, as a group and with our music, that we were
as open to people as our city was. Davide Bortot I think what is kind of interesting is that you have obviously been associated
with Houston, because it is the next big city and everything, but you never
really claimed that, you always represented P.A., Port Arthur, and it was really important to
you, I think. A lot of other people would have said, “Yes, we’re from
Houston,” just to make it easier to get a foothold in the industry. Why didn’t
you ever do that? Bun B When you are from a small town, most people in those towns have a lot of pride
in their community and it’s one thing that we definitely had. We loved being from
where we’re from and it made us the people that we are, and I think we're
pretty good people. For us, we knew that a lot of the people in that small
town would probably never leave that town. They would never go out in the
world, they would never be able to go and see things. Most of the people I
know that I grew up with never left Texas, much less the US. So for us, it is
important to let them know that no matter where we went in the world we
represented for them, for the people who couldn’t go out into the world. It would be very easy for me to just say Houston every time someone asked me where I
am from. It would be easy for me to say Houston, but the easy way
has never been the way we take it. We wanted people to respect us as we
were, we never wanted to try and fancy it up or dress it up a little bit.
We’re from a small town, Port Arthur, you either like it or you don’t, you
either accept it or you don’t. Either way we’re going to make this music, we’re going
to be here, we’re not going anywhere. For me, it feels good to be in Los
Angeles and New York and even in Barcelona and be like, “Port Arthur is in the
house.” Those people see those moments on TV or the internet or things like
that, and it uplifts them because it is very easy for people to forget where
they come from. It is very easy once you “succeed” in the music industry to
forget the little people. But for us, we are the little people, we are the
underdogs – that’s why the group is called the Underground Kingz, because we
were always the guys that nobody thought could do it. Because we came from a
town full of people that people thought couldn’t do it and would only be who they
were. It was important for us to let people know, “Don't think you know
everything about me, just because I'm from a small town.” Believe me, I can
take it wherever I need to take it. Davide Bortot So, I guess it was 8-Ball &
MJG, they refused to have their music
called hip-hop, they say they made “country rap”. Can you relate to that state of mind? Bun B Yeah. A lot of times in our early days coming up, hip-hop and all of the movement,
for whatever reasons, they didn’t want to include us. There was a geographical
distance thing or whatever, but I think people just didn’t think we knew what
we were talking about. They didn’t think we had the same appreciation, and
when you really think about it, hip-hop is more of a lifestyle. It is not just
music – hip-hop is MCing, DJing, breakdancing and graffiti. We are just MCs. So what we do may be considered a part of hip-hop, but we are not hip-hop. We just really wanted to carve out our own identity. Since we thought we can't
really be a part of what they are doing, so we will do what we do and make
sure people fully understand that it is of itself, primarily just from
this area. In saying that, we never wanted to exclude ourselves from other
people, and we didn’t want other people to not get into what we are doing, we just
wanted people to understand what the core of what we were doing meant. In
America, if you don’t live in a major metropolitan city, they call you
“country,” it’s basically that simple. You are country, or you’re “bama.” With me, I don't mind
being country, I love being from the country, I love being from a small town.
If you think something is wrong with that, then obviously you are out of your
rabid-ass mind. Davide Bortot How important was Houston as a city for you to become the MC that you are now?
Did you go there often to go to clubs, record stores, or whatever? Bun B Obviously, yes, that was the hub for any and all things rap and hip-hop in Texas, as far as I knew. If you wanted the new albums, you either had
to order them specifically or you could just ride to Houston and Houston would
have them. Same thing with concerts, we didn't really get a lot of concerts in
Port Arthur, the only concert I remember as a rap concert was the Geto
Boys and that wasn't until ‘90 or
‘91. So, if we really wanted to see something or know something about rap, we
had to get in the car and drive an hour and a half, go to record stores, go to
the flea markets. You would have to bring your radio with you so you could put
on a local radio show and it would have rap shows on Saturday night. The
university in Houston, Texas Southern University, has a communications department and they have a radio
station, and they used to do a two-hour show called Kids Jam, which would basically debut all
of the new rap records. So unless you had a real big antenna at your house,
you couldn't catch the radio [coming from] Houston. So we would ride out to Houston on
weekends and bring a radio with us, tape the shows, and then bring the shows back
home and play them to people. Davide Bortot So the production, was it all Pimp C back then? Or were you involved in the records as well? Bun B I did a couple of tracks in the beginning, but I realized that I was just
making beats, that I wasn't a producer. There is a difference and I don't
think a lot of people realize that. Probably anyone in this room can make a
beat, someone shows them how to work the
MPC
and play the keys, you don't even need to play the keyboard. Davide Bortot I can’t. Bun B I know you can. Davide Bortot No, I can’t. Bun B You can! Trust me, I said the same thing. You take a record, a turntable, a
sampler and a drum machine and anybody can make a beat. But that does not make
you a producer. Being a producer is knowing the right kind of sound from the
records, hearing the whole song inside your head before you even touch the
first instrument. People like that, you hear them and see their eyes roll
back [sings a beat], you’re like, “What are you singing?” And they’re like: “Some song.” You
go in there and hear the beat and it’s like [sings the same beat], “Damn! How did you
even know how to get that shit out of your fucking head into a machine?”
That’s the difference between a beatmaker and a producer. Davide Bortot So were you always around when Pimp made the beats, or did he do it in a
studio at home and brought you the beats and you rapped on them? Bun B No, we would sit around and Pimp would make beats all day. Most producers, that is
pretty much what they do: they wake up, they go to the machine and they start
making music. They’ll make four, five, sometimes even as many as ten songs. But
most producers I know will make it, and then you'll listen to it and be like, “Damn, that
shit’s dope, that shit’s dope.” And they’ll be like, “Nah, it’s bullshit,” and
they clear the whole board. I’ll be like, “What the fuck is wrong with you?”
They’re like, “That shit was garbage,” and they’ll start again and you’re
like, “Damn! Actually, that’s better than the last shit.” “Yeah, but I don’t
like the drums, fuck that shit!” I’m like, “Come on man, what you doing?” And
they’re like, “No, man, if we’re going to do it, it’s got to be perfect, every
song. We can’t put out half-assed music, not if we care about what we are
doing and not for who we represent. People where we are from don’t get a
second chance, so when we come, we got to come with it.” And he was always
right. Davide Bortot So the “Tell Me Something Good"
record, do you remember how it came about when you recorded it? Bun B Yeah, we did that record actually at Pimp’s mom’s house. All the first album,
the preproduction was done at Pimp’s mom’s, but “Tell Me Something Good”
specifically… We originally started doing all the music at Pimp’s bedroom
because he only had a little keyboard and a little sampler and a little Dr
Rhythm
drum machine and
shit. We were making literally everything in the bedroom and rapping on a
RadioShack microphone. Then we started saving up money and invested it in
bigger equipment and we all went in and bought an
Ensoniq. Once we got the
Ensoniq, it was too big for the bedroom, so his mom was like, “You can put that
shit in the den, but let me know when y’all gon’ make that music so I can go to my
room or something.” We were making music that at first, his stepfather Monroe,
he would just call it “noise” because he was from a different generation. He
didn’t really understand it, and lots of older people would just call it
noise. So for us, we wanted to incorporate records into our records that we
knew our parents listened to and was the shit for them, and we were going to put our rap spin
on it and make it happen. So, “Tell Me Something Good”, the original
record was by Rufus featuring Chaka Khan. Anybody over 30 years old in the
US knows this record – it’s a major record, always a party starter. My mother
loved the record, his mother, everybody loved the fucking record, so we
thought if we do “Tell Me Something Good,” then at least they won’t complain
about that one. On every album, we wanted to try and pull some of those
records that we knew people loved from a different generation, just so that
they would be able to have a chance to get into us a little bit. They weren’t
going to listen to a “Pocket Full Of Stones,” but maybe they would
listen to “One Day.” (music: UGK – “Tell Me Something
Good” (Original)) Wow! I’m 35 years old, I was 18 when I made that. I sound fucking crazy at 18. I
was trying real hard to let people know I was hard back then, I hear that in
my voice. What the fuck was wrong with me? That’s actually crazy that you
found that version. The version that he just played is the actual original
version that we recorded. When the record company got ready to put the album
out, they pulled the sample because they told us it didn’t clear, but then I
found out later that they just didn’t want to pay for it. That’s the kind of
shit record companies do to you. But that’s it, that’s the first song we actually went
with into what you would call a fully functioning recording studio. I recorded all
of that on a reel, just going to the studio and being like, “Yeah, we went to
the studio today.” We brought the tape from the studio and we brought it to the house, put it up on the
wall, we were like, “That’s our first tracklist, look at that shit.” That shit was
big for us. The only other people to make music from Port Arthur, Texas, were
Archie Bell & The
Drells and Janis
Joplin. You’re looking at the ‘60s
and the ‘70s and then nothing for 30-odd years. To us it was a big
accomplishment, not just for ourselves, but for Port Arthur people. Davide Bortot So what kind of music were you listening to back then, since there was no hip-hop music scene in Port Arthur – what was there, New York rap or other Southern
rap? Bun B You could hear rap, most of the music out at that time was basically the East
Coast scene – Juice Crew, Big Daddy
Kane, Kool G Rap. I remember the first time I heard Public Enemy
Public Enemy, “My Uzi Weighs A
Ton,” goddamn! I was a
big bass head back in the day, I loved bass. In Houston, in Texas, we have a real
big car culture, because of the fact Texas is so big. Texas still has a
million acres of land that is not even civilised, that is just land with no people
living there. Unlike in Europe, you can’t get anywhere in Houston on a bike. In Texas you’d
be tired and sweating, you’d be no good when you get there. Everybody
has a car, and in order to make your car stand out from the other thousands of
cars in the city, you’re either going to put the crazy candy paint or the
rims on it, or you are going to put a lot of music in it, especially if you
don't have money for rims and paint and shit. I remember when I was little, my
mom would go to sleep, I would take the speakers off the house stereo,
lay them on the back seat of the car, wire them up. We wouldn’t even play
them through the car system, we would have a radio that somebody took out of
somebody's car and a car battery, and we would have that shit wired to the
battery and the speakers wired to the radio through the outputs, and be playing
it like that, just riding around. People were like, “That’s banging, what you
got in there?” “My momma’s speakers.” That is what you do, you
compromise in this world. Everybody can’t afford to do what other people do,
but that doesn't mean you can’t be part of the party. Davide Bortot So what music was really big in Texas, was that East Coast rap? How about Miami bass music, was that relevant? Bun B We didn't even look at that shit like that, because it was still so new. Rap
music just started getting regionalized over the last ten or 15 years or so. Back in
‘89, when you listened to Big Daddy Kane, you didn't consider him an East
Coast rapper, he was just a rapper. You listened to
N.W.A., the only reason you would be like,
“Those are West Coast people,” is because they wore L.A. shit all day, every
day. And when the Southern rap started coming you had in the early days DJ Magic Mike, he would
just make bass music, just beats with stupid bass in it, no rapping, nothing. That
shit went gold. He was the only person I know that went gold with a rap album
that didn’t rap. What kind of shit is that? No video, no radio play, nothing.
Everybody wanted the bass. Ghetto-style DJ shit like the Gucci
Crew, MC Shy D, MC
Twist. The early
Rap-A-Lot Records like “You
Got To Be Down,” “CarFreak” — that was the first Geto Boys. The
first-ever Geto Boys were Slim
Jukebox, Prince Johnny C, Bushwick Bill and DJ Reddy Red.
Scarface didn't get to the
Geto Boys until the second album. So we were listening to that kind of shit, and I remember listening to the first Geto Boys album and hearing things like “Assassins” and
“My Balls And My Word,” and then
hearing Houston in the middle of the rhymes. It will fuck you up, like, “Wow, Houston people are
making rap music? That is crazy! I didn't even know people can do shit like
that. This rap shit is going to be all right.” Next thing you know, people in
my own town started rapping. I was like, “Hell, no!” I was breakdancing, but I
didn’t really look like I knew a lot of MCs back then. I look like it now
because I’m a little bit past my prime, as you can see, but I used to be the
suicide man. I used to be breaking and falling on my back and jumping up, and I
can’t do any of that shit no more. But East Coast, if you want to call it
that, the early inception of rap, once the West Coast guys had really started
making more harder-edged music, that is when the South was like, “Yeah, I think we
can do that.” Davide Bortot So you said it wasn’t important to you where rap came from, but still your
early record was called The Southern
Way. Bun B We just wanted people to see the way we do things. Everybody knows how in [New York]
they ride on the subways and they go to the bodegas, in L.A. they gang-bang and shit
like that. We just wanted to say they have their way, we has it his way, but
down here we do it our way, the Southern way. Davide Bortot Was there any gang-banging in Houston back then? Bun B Not really, not gangs like Bloods and Crips, anything like that. I don’t think Houston got
Bloods and Crips until maybe five years ago. Within the last five or six years you have people who would come from the
penitentiary who would have affiliation through prison, but as far as just
being on the streets, neighborhoods being blue or red, we didn’t have that.
That being said, the south side of Houston was always into red – red cars and things like that, but it
was never a gang thing. North side of Houston was always into blue things. It
had no correlation with what was going on in L.A.. We had south side
people, who didn’t like north side people and vice versa, but could you find
it anywhere. Anywhere you go where there is a south side and a north side they
probably won't get along. Korea, Ireland, all that shit, motherfuckers don’t
get along! Davide Bortot Is the whole south side and north side thing still a big issue in Houston? Bun B It got big during the screw tape
scene. Lots of problems came about from the screw tape scene, simply because
screw music was purely south side, and they were talking about how much money
they were making and the cars and all the shit they were doing. And north side
people were like, “Damn! It’s not like we ain’t doing it, we’re balling,
we’re making money, we’re doing the same shit.” But they didn’t really have
the outlet to represent that kind of thing. Michael
Watts and them didn’t
come until four or five years after
[DJ] Screw
, so it did get crazy for a while. But
then again, even then it was specific neighborhoods versus specific
neighborhoods. It was never everybody from the north side beefing against
everybody from the south side. It was people from Third Ward getting into it with the Rosewood
cats on the north side. It even got on the tapes: “Boys from Rosewood trying to come through, and we strapped up at the after-hours, it’s whatever.” It was crazy for a while. Unless I’m mistaken, I think they had a bulletproof… What it was, they
were robbing people in cars just as nice as the car they were driving. So when
the car would pull up on you, you thought it was just another car and the next
thing they're jumping out with AKs and
shit and then they jumping in your car and both cars are going down the
street. You’re like, “What the fuck just happened?” It would be like if
somebody pulled up in a Rolls-Royce, took you out of your Rolls-Royce and
robbed you. It was people jumping out of nice shit to take nice shit, it was
crazy. Davide Bortot You mentioned screw music, and for us Europeans who grew up on a healthy Pete
Rock, Nas and Wu-Tang
diet, it was always hard to
understand what you guys were doing. But with screw music, when I first heard
it, I thought, “What’s going on here?” Bun B Me too. Davide Bortot When did you first hear about screw music? Bun B I wanna be very, very specific about that. I met Screw in ‘92 before
the mixtapes were going on. At the time, Screw was just a mixtape DJ like
everybody else, making mixtapes and selling them, just a regular thing. It was
probably around the end of ‘92 I got one of his mixtapes and it was totally
fucking different, the shit was all slow. I brought the shit back and was like “Screw, my tape is fucked up.” If you
remember back in the cassette days... anybody here ever actually bought a
cassette? Ten years ago, did you buy a cassette? Not just an album, but when you buy a 100-minute cassette? If you got the 100-minute ones,
sometimes it’d be so much tape in it, it would get caught up. Especially back
then, if you tape too much, that shit would pop and then you’d have to get out
and splice it, get some Scotch tape and patch the shit back up. Sometimes it would get too thick, I had
some that was popped in two or three different places, the shit would get all
fucked up. So I was like, “Screw, my shit must be fucked up, maybe there’s too
much tape or something in here.” He was like, “My bad,” and he gave me another
one and the shit sounded the same. I said, “Something’s wrong with this one too,” and
he said, “No, man! That’s how the shit goes, that's how it's supposed to
sound.” I was like, “OK, alright.” So I rode around with it like, “I don’t get this shit.” And then I heard myself [chopped and screwed] and
I was like, “Whoa… now, I really don't understand this shit, my shit was
never meant to be like this.” In my own mind I couldn’t really grab the
concept of that shit. Then, one night I’m out at the car wash on MLK, it was a Saturday
night, and I heard it playing in a car with a lot of system, a lot of bass in the motherfucker, and I
heard how long that bass kick would last with a record being played at a third
of the speed, and I was like, “That is what it is about. This shit is about
making the bass even louder, you can play it harder. I can get used to this
shit.” Then I smoked me a blunt or two and that’s when it really started
making a lot of sense. I was like, “Now I can get into this shit for real.” It
was so mellow and laid-back. It’s not something you have to be high to get,
but you do need to be in a very relaxed state of mind. So if you can get
yourself in your own personal Xanadu without doing drugs, that is beautiful. I absolutely recommend that. But if
you’re already doing something, then screw music is the perfect thing to do it
to (laughter). Davide Bortot We could try it. (music: UGK – “Int'l Players Anthem (Chopped and Screwed)”) Bun B Now, keep in mind that a screw tape still has all the traditional shit that an
average mixtape has – it has trick scratching, shout outs and all of that, and the
only difference is the tempo. That was an original invention by Screw and it
is so crazy, because very seldom do you have an invention named after the
inventor. When Michael Watts and different people started making these
mixtapes, people got offended, because they were saying that it is screwed up, but
only Screw can screw a mixtape. How can you say that? That's like saying I just
“bun’d it”, and “how can you bun it if you ain’t Bun?” There was a lot of beef. There are
still a lot of people who feel funny about it because it was one man’s
invention, it was named after him, by him, for him, and then other people started
doing it but giving him no credit or no acknowledgement of the fact that it was
his invention, his creation. There are people today who still feel that there
are certain DJs who have not given it up enough for Screw. I remember when Justo [Faison] – rest in
peace, it is crazy because they are both gone now – but Justo put together the
mixtape awards in America for the DJs to honor DJs. I remember when they
called – Screw said that they were giving him a special award because he
created his own special style of DJing, and he said, “Man, I never thought
them boys would fuck with me. I always thought there was hating.” I was like,
“Man, they just didn’t get it.” I can understand, because people didn't get what we were doing
until years after the fact. As a DJ, and coming up on people like
Grandmaster
Kaz and
all these guys, Flash and Marley Marl, and having these
people saying, “It is incredible what you did.” And I think they even
gave him a ring and he never took it off. He never took it off. Davide Bortot Was it important back then that people from other regions would feel
your music and understand what you were trying to say? Bun B Yeah, like the same way that we’d listen to music and try and figure out, what the
fuck does “buck 50” mean, what does that mean? You would hear all these regional sayings from
places, and you would be like, “What does that shit mean?” So you have to keep
listening to the records and try to listen to the context of the record,
take some kind of uneducated and misguided guess. Sometimes you got it right,
sometimes you got it wrong, but a lot of it was just trying to figure out what
it was they were into. For us, we were just happy that people took the time to
listen to our shit, to try and figure it out and really get into our world, because that is what
our music was, it was really letting you into our world. For people to come in and
appreciate it and be like, “I liked it, and then when I found that you all were
talking about this, man, that is my shit now.” That’s how I used to feel,
that is how I still feel when I listen to shit. I was watching this kid—where were we?—we just left Denmark. There's a kid,
Bushido, he's not from
Denmark but he’s a European rapper. Davide Bortot He’s German. Bun B German, yeah. I was listening to this song, and I had no
idea exactly what he was saying but I could get the text of it, he was saying,
“Ching ching, bling bling, it’s a ghetto thing, thing.” I was like, he is talking about making money, and if you ain’t from the hood trying to
make money, you probably don’t understand it. You don't have to understand
German to get that shit. It is just about the fact that people are taking the
time to get into what you are doing. That is really what we make it for,
to see if people really appreciate the effort put into it. Because for years
people didn't think rap really took much, they thought we were just saying shit over
other people’s records, and nothing could be further from the case. Davide Bortot I think for a kid who grows up with hip-hop nowadays it is kind of impossible
to imagine that there was a time where rap music from the South was not that
popular. Today it’s all about the
Jeezys and the T.I.s. So when do you think it turned
around? Bun B When [Geto Boys'] “Mind Playing Tricks On Me” went
to number one on the charts, not just number one on the rap chart, but the number
one record in the country. The Geto Boys and the 2 Live Crew, these people went out and
they went to every one of these cities before any of us did. They went out
there when we didn't know what people would think of us, they didn’t care.
They basically formed a path that everybody walks now. It’s easy for us to do
it now, but back then, for one, being from the South, everybody assumed that
if you were not stupid, you were at least dumber than them. That is just a
given. That has nothing to do with music, that is just being a Southerner,
just being a Southern person – they assume you are stupid, uneducated,
ignorant, tacky. You've got no fresh, no swag, none of that shit and you don’t
know what the fuck you are talking about it. So the first thing was to try and break that idea, that notion, and a lot of that came through the lyricism of
Scarface. Him being such an incredible writer and lyricist, people just had to
give it up, they were like, “Yo, this dude here is a real fucking
rapper.” Then you had the braggadocio, Willie D, coming through like, “This is the South and you can call us country and all that
you want, but if I hear you say it, I’m going to beat your ass.” And it was
evident that, “OK, I don’t know what they’re doing, but that dude is gonna kick
somebody's ass, so if I don’t like it I’m going to just keep quiet about it.”
That is the best thing to do, just keep quiet. And then
Bushwick [Bill] was there to let you
know it’s still music, still a party. Everybody was still having a good time,
it’s all right to dance, it’s OK to laugh, it is OK to have a little fun with
it. But the early days of those guys going out there, you heard a lot of stories of them going to these
different cities and people thinking they were a joke, and there were so many
towns that they had to fight their way out of. Then they would come
back to that same city that they had to fight their way out of and they would
be kings, because they had earned the respect. That is really what it is about,
not been scared to go out and say, “I don’t care if you like me. If you don’t like me today, I’ll be here
tomorrow and maybe you’ll like me then.” That is really what this is about.
When you’re an artist trying to get into the game, most people aren’t going to
like what you are doing. That’s OK, because they probably just don't get you
yet. I remember the first time I heard The
Chronic, I thought it was terrible.
Most people I knew thought it was terrible. And the next day everybody was
like. “This is the shit.” I remember we popped it in and we thought, “This is
The Chronic? This shit ain’t better than an N.W.A. album.” But it was so new,
everything Dre put in The Chronic
was so new, the way he was structuring songs, the way he was producing, the
way people were even rapping – Snoop and RBX and
Kurupt, they brought a
whole new style and interactivity into the game, and the shit was a little bit
too much to process the first day. Then the next day we listened and were, “Yo, I don’t know what we were thinking yesterday, this shit is not jamming,
this is the most jamming shit I ever heard.” It took me two or three listens
to really get into it and I realize it wasn’t just songs, it was an album. A
lot of rap was just eight songs or ten songs, random rapping about the girl,
rapping about the club, rapping about the car, rapping about the neighborhood,
rapping about peace, rapping about war and whatever the fuck. The Chronic
was a full thought-out album from beginning to end – the way the skits
were done, the music, the way it was put together, it was very fucking precise,
and I think it really changed the way people put shit together. I know it
did for us, not to emulate it, but we had to make sure
our shit would stand out like this. They may not
get it at first, but they keep listening to it and they’ll realise it’s just a
little different and that’s why I didn’t get it, it’s a bit different to what
I’m used to. This shit is good music, period. Davide Bortot So is it important to you when you are creating an album to do something like
The Chronic was, a coherent, consistent album? Bun B Yeah, because like I said, most rappers are not consistent. It is not coherent, it is just random thoughts over random beats. And with that kind of shit going on, it is
understandable why a lot of it gets criticized, because most people are not
putting a lot of effort into what they were doing, they were not looking at it
as a full project. As soon as we started realizing that we are not just making
music, we are making albums and we actually had careers... In the early days nobody
knew how long that shit was going to go on. Once people sort of realized, “OK,
I got a record deal, I got a budget, let me sit down and really concentrate on
what the fuck I’m doing and how it is going to be presented,” that is really
where the game started changing with us. When we were younger we were just
making songs about going out one day and we saw a dude in a nice car and women
were jocking him, and we'd make a song about women jocking the car. But then we
started thinking that we needed to make a full album, we needed to pick a theme, and we need to ride on that theme, so that's what we started doing. Davide Bortot I think it is pretty common sense that the closest you got to making a proper
“album” album is the Ridin’
Dirty album, would you agree
with that? Bun B I kind of would have to. Musically, we were probably in our prime for the
time, lyrically we were definitely in prime for the time, and we had a lot of
shit going on in our personal lives too that affected a lot of Ridin’ Dirty.
But, more than anything, Ridin’ Dirty was the first album where Pimp and I
got to do every song the way we wanted to do it. We got to put
the album together the way we wanted to put it together, we got to do the
cover artwork the way we wanted to do it. It was the first time when a record
company said, “You guys know what you are doing.” Even the record company
thought we were stupid — remember, we’re from the South, we don’t know what
the fuck we’re doing — they would be like, “That is a good song, but the
people in L.A. aren’t going to get that, you probably need to do this.” I
said, “I didn’t make this for the people in L.A. to get it, I made it for all
the people. It doesn't matter where you're from. I’m not concerned about
making something that New York is going to jam. If it is good music, they will jam
get it anyway. You are thinking about radio and the people that you hang
around with, I could give a fuck about that. Give that shit to the man in the
street and he gon’ dig it.” Their problem was that they were scared and
they would only service it to people in the South in the street. I used to go
to New York for my album and I couldn’t find it. I’d be like, “Where my shit at up here?” They’d be like, “We have it
in a couple places but we don’t think people…” I’d be like, “There are eight
million people in New York, how the fuck do you know what eight million people
think? Why don’t you sell more music? If y’all know what the fuck people wanted
to hear, wouldn’t y’all be billionaires. Every record you put out would be number
one around the world. Bullshit. You don’t know what you’re doing. Give the
shit a chance.” Ridin’ Dirty was the first time they said, “OK, this screw
shit, the candy paint and the cars, I think people can get it.” I said, “No,
shit! You can see screw tapes selling all over the world. We have been
telling you about screw for three fucking years. Now all of a sudden? You don’t think, you know,
let’s be real, so let us do our thing.” “Do the album, make the music, this is
the budget. Make it in the budget and we will put the shit out.” And that is
what we did, they left us the fuck alone and we made the album we were
supposed to make. Davide Bortot Let’s listen to a song maybe… Bun B If you’re an artist, you have to fight for your individuality, don't just take
what the fuck a record company tells you. Argue with them motherfuckers, call
your A&R a son of a bitch, don’t be
scared. They just people, they can’t hurt you. Just tell them how the
fuck you feel and they will actually respect you a lot more for it, believe
me. I called my CEO a bitch, that wasn’t a good one. (Laughter) They didn't answer the
phone for two months, but it’s all good. When they did answer the phone, they knew who they were talking to. Davide Bortot By the way, talking about labels, I remember there was a situation you put out
an album but didn't do any promo for it. Which one was that? Bun B Yes, that probably would have been Dirty
Money, and that was because
there was just a lot of bullshit with them. We finally had the big record with Jay-Z, “Big Pimpin’”, and that
was something they could understand. “OK, it was Jay-Z, it was Timbaland, it was a hit record. Let's just do
another one, then y’all can have a big hit too.” I’m like, “That’s not a UGK
song, that’s a Jay-Z song. We don’t do Jay-Z songs, we do UGK songs.” And they
were like, “Still, now people know you from this.” I'm like, “I don’t give a
fuck where people know me from, that is not how I want to be presented on my
own projects. If that’s how he wants to present me on his shit that’s cool,
but when it comes to my shit, my shit rolls different, with no disrespect
to Jay or Timbaland.” They wanted Hype
Williams to shoot a video and all
that shit, so I’m like, “OK, let me get this straight, if I go and get Jay-Z
and Timbaland and do another song, you will pay half a million for Hype to do
a video. But, if I don't get Jay-Z and Timbaland, will Hype still do my
video?” “Well, let’s not concentrate on that.” “No, simple questions – if we do this
and we don’t put them on it, do we still get a Hype Williams video?” “Probably
not.” “Gotcha! Well, fuck you and fuck this album, we’ll turn it in and you do
what you want to do with it.” Davide Bortot We need to talk about the Jay-Z song later, but let’s hear a UGK song, as you put
it. Here’s one off Ridin’ Dirty. (music: UGK – “One Day”) Bun B Thanks. I perform that song at every show but it’s always different when you
listen to it. I don’t know if that’s just me. I don’t listen to myself, and I
do probably a good 150 shows a year and perform that song 150 times a year,
but I never really listen to it. There’s a certain disconnection you have
sometimes as a performer, like, you know it’s your words but it’s just like tying your
shoes and shit, that’s just what the fuck you do for a living. Like, if you
work at McDonald’s, you make the Big Mac, you don’t fucking think about it,
you just make the Big Mac. That’s what we do as rappers. When I listen to it,
it’s crazy because it still hits me the way it did when we wrote it. When we
made this record we couldn’t believe that it hit us like it did. It’s a very
personal record, there’s a lot of very real shit on that song and to
hear it today it’s still crazy. I just left Orange not too long ago and riding through there, I was thinking about boxing. I talk
to my homeboy Bobo all the time and he’s remarried and has a new baby girl
now, and we still do these songs and every now and then we get choked up on stage. We
still cry when we hear this record, because we’re talking about people that
we loved and lost, and that’s real shit. And that is when music is supposed to be at its best. Don't
get me wrong, at the very least music should entertain people, but music when
it is done at its best should be able to inspire and enlighten people and take
them somewhere. It is supposed to be a transcendental experience, it really
is. Davide Bortot I think on an emotional level some of your songs are very strong, people can
relate to them, and I think part of that is that you are consciously trying to
keep it simple somehow — the flow and even some words, it is very direct and
straight and appealing in a straight way. Is that something you try to do
consciously? Bun B Pimp’s main thing was that he didn't want to lose people with flows and
styles, he was like, “Bun B, you can do all that shit, you the lyricist, you can do the crazy
flows and I’m gonna keep my shit sweet and simple.” But for records like that, we tried to keep the flow very simple because we had to get the message
across to people. It wasn’t about us showing off as lyricists and writers. It
was about really getting the pure message across, and with a record like “One Day,”
the whole point of it was that we know that everybody goes through loss, we
all grieve, and it’s painful for everybody, so why not let people know that we
are just like them? A lot of times in rap music particularly, people put up
walls and they put up these pedestals and soapboxes to preach to you and look
down to you, like, “Yeah, I’m the shit.” When really we should be like, “Yeah,
I’m the shit and you can be the shit too.” That is the message we need to be
getting across to people, not that, “I made it and look at you, ha ha, you’re
still broke.” This is about everybody coming up. With us, we’re like,
“Yeah, we might be UGK, we might sell records, but when I lose a friend it hurts
me just like it hurts you. When somebody goes to jail it hurts me just like it
hurts you.” Everything we go through in life. And sometimes for us it’s
a lot worse because I'll be out of town somewhere when somebody passes away
and I can’t get back in time for the burial. That has happened to me at least
four times. One time in particular, my aunt passed away, and she was a woman, who,
when my mother had to work late I would go and stay with. I couldn't even
grasp the concept that she had died because I hadn't gone to the funeral. You
associate it with the past, you go to the wake or the funeral and make your
peace with it. But because I wasn’t there and I was removed from the situation,
I would come home after about a month and be like, “Aunt Jen is dead,
right?” And my mom would say, “Yes, yes. I just told you last month, she is
dead, accept it and deal with it and move forward.” But that’s the thing, you
get so far gone in this music sometimes that you can lose a sense of reality. So we
try and put as much reality into the music as possible so that it is always
there, you always know who you are, you always know where you status is. Davide Bortot I think there is not one single rapper on the whole scene or industry that doesn't
respect you, and I think a lot of that comes from you being honest. Is that
what you mean when you say reality? Bun B Absolutely. I know the first time when we went on the radio and told
people we were broke. We didn’t tell the radio station what we were doing, we
just said we want to come up and go on the air today and they said sure, so we
went to the radio and they said, “What is going on with UGK today?” And we
said: “Shit, UGK is broke,” and they said, “Excuse me?” And we said, “Yep,
we’re broke, the record company are playing us. We signed a fucked deal, and
we fucked up, you bought all those records and we didn't get a dime of it.” So
then people are calling up and going, “Why didn’t y’all get paid?” So then we
pull out the contract and start explaining to people on the air how fucked up
our contract was, and it gave the consumer an inside look into this – they
wouldn’t understand at the time. “You sold 500,000 records, shouldn't you get
a cheque from that?” “No, I can’t get a cheque from that because the way my
deal works I don’t get paid off that, I get paid off this. I only get paid off
the 7% of what money is made, not the 100%.” People didn’t know this type of
thing, the consumer didn't know this about the game. We tried to expose as
much of this shit as possible. One, for an up-and-coming artist who might want
to be us, it is important for you to know the game and have as much information
as possible and know how these record companies will fuck you over. And
two, you can front the people all you want, eventually they will see who you
are. You keep talking about Benzs and Bentleys and you got all this money, and eventually somebody’s going to see you get out of a car, and if it is not the Benz or the
Bentley, you are going to get confronted. Like, “Bun B, you jumping out of a
Hyundai? What the fuck you doing in a Hyundai? You said you rolling in
a Benz?” People see you shopping, they see you taking the kids to eat, you
will get exposed. I don’t care who you are and how good you think your lie is,
it will catch up with you. This is the internet age, with camera phones, there is a
camera on every corner in most major cities. So whoever you really are, if you’re
telling them you’ve got all women in the world, but you really like men, you
can front all you want to, we will eventually catch you with a boy. The
reality is, nobody really cares who you fuck with, nobody cares – we’re only mad
because you lie. People should be real about who they are and honest about who
they are and let the people decide if they want to fuck with you or not. You’d be surprised. “Well, I ain’t got all that, but I have talent.” “Good enough for me, let’s go.” Most people don’t
really give a shit about that. You make good music, I can deal with that. Davide Bortot But still, between talent, truth and being real to where you come from, to not selling out, that is a big difference and there are a
lot of compromises in there. So when the record company asks you to make the
next Jay-Z record... Just to explain that, you had the Jay-Z record, “Big Pimpin’,” it blew up on national radio and made you famous in other parts of the country. Then they ask you on your
next record to do another track with Jay-Z and Timbaland. How tempting was
that at the time, did you think about it one time? Bun B Not at all. For us, the exposure was good but we knew it wasn’t ours. Like,
“This song is number one but don’t get big heads because this isn’t your song.
You may have helped this song be number one, but we know who the star is. Let’s
be real, it’s a Jay-Z record, the biggest shit on the planet. Keep it very
real, don’t get a big head, get back in your little world.” Because all that’s
going to happen is, if I let them go and get the Jay-Z verse, then they are
going to pay $100,000 for that. And if I go and get a Timbaland beat, at that
time they would have had to pay half a million dollars for that. The Hype
Williams video, a half million dollars for that – so already just off one song
I’m $1.2 million in the hole. Now, do you wanna be famous or do you want to
actually make a fucking living out of your music? That is what a lot of
artists have to come to terms with. Very few people get to be rich and famous,
it doesn't really work like that. You either get to be rich — those are the
people who work behind the scenes, the producers, executive producers and
people like that — or you can be famous, the ones in front of the camera doing
all the singing and dancing. Everybody doesn’t get to be Mick Jagger, we're
not all going to be filthy fucking rich and super fucking famous. So at the
very least, maintain your integrity, you can make a living off of integrity. Davide Bortot So there is the money argument and there is the argument that the song with
Jay-Z would have been your song, but if you heard
the song now, the “Big Pimpin’” record, aren’t you proud of it? If you play
it in a club nowadays, it still works, people still go crazy. Doesn’t it make
you proud at all? Bun B It’s not like I’m not proud of the music, but at the same time it is not my
song. I can try and take as much claim as I can but that shit says Jay-Z
featuring UGK, not UGK and Jay-Z. It was his record, he asked us to be a part
of it, we put it together, it ended up being a big thing, but after that he still
gets to be a superstar and I am still here in my world. I did get a few more
fans, yes, I did increase my fan base a little bit, but still at the end of
the day, if I go out of my way just to appease the new people who listen to me
just because of Jay-Z, then I disrespect the 500,000 people who have been
supporting me just because I am me. And I'd rather have people like me for me
than like me for anybody else. Fuck that, like me for me, because if you like
me for Jay-Z, as soon as you stop liking Jay-Z you stop liking me, right? So
if you are going to fuck with me, fuck with me on my terms and on my terms
only, or don’t fuck with me at all. I'm still going to sleep at night. It’s
all good. Davide Bortot So, I think we have a very good example here of a record with Jay-Z that is
still very much a Bun B song or a UGK song. (music: Bun B feat. Jay-Z – “Get
Throwed”) So that’s a song with Jay-Z. Jay’s verse is at the end of the song. When I
listen to your music or just look at what you do with your music, sometimes it
even looks like you do that stuff consciously. Like, you have the Jay-Z verse,
but you put it at the end of the song just to show people that, “I can have
the Jay-Z verse but I can put it in the end if I want to.” Is that true? Bun B No, you put the Jay-Z verse at the end of the song so people listen to
the whole record. Especially for a DJ, because otherwise the DJ gets the Jay-Z
verse and then it’s on to the next record. So if you want the Jay-Z verse on
here, you have to listen to the whole song. Anybody out there, you get a big-name feature, you spend a lot of money on them, put them at the end of the
song. If you put them at the beginning, when they play it on the radio, as
soon as that person’s verse is over they are going to go to the next record.
Be very careful with things. Spend your money and make sure people stay to the
big show, you have to make it a big surprise at the end. Davide Bortot So that was a song off your solo album
Trill, released in 2005. In
2002 your partner, Pimp C, was incarcerated. Whenever a
good friend is incarcerated it is always hard, but for you as a musician, as a
group, what did that mean to you in that moment? What did you think when you
heard that he would need to go to prison? Bun B I was in the courtroom when he was sentenced and my primary concern, for one,
was for his kids. As a father and as a provider for his family, how do you
take care of your family while you’re in prison? So to me, that was my main
concern: how do helpless men continue to earn money? How do I make sure that
his name still has weight when he comes home from prison, so that he can
continue to make music and provide for his family? Initially, we didn’t know.
He had recorded some songs before he went in to try and put something out
during the time, but he wasn’t going to be available to actively promote the
album. So I said, “OK, I am going to have to make sure I get out there and
promote his name as much as I can.” There are no guidelines for that kind of
situation, rap-wise anyway. There had never been a situation where you take a
two-man group and you take one of them out the group. How does the group exist
when it is an individual as opposed to a group? That is the meaning of the
word group, more than one person, so how do you continue to exist? And for a
while we weren’t really sure about how to keep it going. I went and visited
Pimp and we would talk about different things, and he was like, “You know, you
have to make an album, right?” And I said, “I’m not making an album by myself,
that’s dead in the water.” He was like, “Man, you are going to have to, it is
the only way, you are still UGK. Just because I’m not on the streets, we are
still UGK. People know we are down with each other, you have to keep the music
going and keep the name alive.” I had apprehensions about that shit myself,
because I didn’t want people to think that once my man got locked up I’m
off on my own and doing my own thing. That is not how I operate, and people
know I am a very loyal friend, so I was like, “How can I make sure that
whenever I’m doing music people know that I’m still down with Pimp?” And that
is where “Free Pimp C” came from, that whole campaign. Whenever I did a
feature or a verse on somebody’s album or wherever I was, I made sure I
shouted “Free Pimp C” so there was always an association with Bun B and Pimp C, so
that people couldn't twist it. For a lot of people it is “out of sight out of
mind”, but my thing is you can’t see him but you can hear him, you’re going to
hear his name constantly. And any time they see me or hear me they are going
to hear me say his name, they are going to see me wearing a shirt with his
picture or something. I’m going to fucking let them know that Pimp C is still
here. Davide Bortot So as far as loyalty, at that point did it even matter to you, or was it even
relevant to you, whatever he did or if he did it? Bun B No, because at that point, if you love people, you don’t get to worrying about
that kind of thing. And I know it sounds crazy, but if your brother killed
somebody, you are going to be like, “Damn, you are a murderer, that's fucked
up” – I’m not saying Pimp’s a murderer, just making a point – “but you’re
terrible, we used to play football in the backyard. I can’t believe you would
want to kill somebody.” But that doesn’t mean you instantly stop loving
somebody. You may not like them much at all but it’s still your blood, it’s
still your kin and it is still your family. It is not easy to write people off
that much sometimes. My thing was like, “OK, you made a mistake, who is to say
that I won’t make mistakes? I can’t sit here and judge you like that but I am
all right with you. I rolled with you before in the good times when we were
making money and riding around and having all kinds of fun, it was all good.
But now that you are going through a rough spot, I am not just going to write
you off like that. I just can’t do that, it is just not in my nature.” Davide Bortot I think Pimp’s case is in a way very special, the wrong circumstances or
whatever, but don’t you think that it is often overlooked in hip-hop,
whenever there is a “free somebody” campaign going on, those people are
actually criminals sometimes? Bun B Yes, absolutely, and sometimes people just don’t care. Of course, he’s a
criminal but he’s in prison he is paying his debt to society, so we’re not just
saying open the doors and let him out. We know that is not possible, that is
more just a reminder. Let my man go, and at some point he can come out on
probation or parole, so give my man a chance, that's all I'm saying. We know
that when we start a “free somebody” campaign, a lot of times the person may
not be free, but sometimes you have to fight a fight you can’t win just to let
people know you are willing to fight. Davide Bortot So at the point when you started your solo career and became a feature machine,
Bun B is on everybody’s song and does solo albums and that kind of stuff, at
that point were you sure you could win this, or was it a fight you just started
to show everybody you’re willing to fight? Bun B I wasn’t sure. I felt like I was in one the greatest groups of all time, and I
never wanted to be a solo artist. I was very comfortable working with Pimp as
a group. I had no intention of wanting to go off and do my own thing, but
sometimes life takes you out of your comfort zone and shows you who you really
are and what you are made of. Had I stayed in a group situation longer, there
is no way of telling if I would have been able to make a conscious decision to go ahead
and try a solo career. My solo career came basically out of necessity, the
fact that it was the best way that I could keep the UGK name going. So for me
to make a solo album, a lot of it was getting started. Once I actually made the
decision to do this… I probably spent 18 months just
sitting around saying, “I can’t do it, I don’t want to do this, I don’t want
to make a solo album. Because, again, I don’t want people thinking I’m
thinking about myself.” But honestly, I’ve talked to people about it and people would be like, “Man, if
you want to go along by yourself that’s totally understood, dude. He caught his case, he went to
prison, whatever you have to do to keep yourself going.” People would have
understood if I decided to go off on my own. But it wasn’t about that. Where I’m from, loyalty is the
key, because in small towns sometimes all you’ve got is your friends. I
know that for a fact, had I been in his position, he would have done exactly
what I did and maybe even more. Sometimes you have to make sure you do for
people what they would do for you, at least that’s how I feel. Davide Bortot Did you talk to him about it, when you consciously started to work on the
album? Bun B Yeah, I would go and see him and send letters and talk about different
stuff. Pimp had input, he said, “Man, you got to talk about the broads.” I
said, “Man, that’s your thing, I don’t really do that, you do those kind of songs.” And he said,
“Well, go and get whoever is doing the best songs about girls right now, it is
not like they're not going to work with you.” So I got the Ying Yang
Twins, who were making all the
best booty records at the time, and said, “Yo, let’s make a booty record,” and
they were like, “Hell, yeah.” Davide Bortot The solo album was a totally different approach to what you did with UGK. UGK
always had its sound, had its topics, its style, and now this solo record featured
pretty much everybody and there was a whole lot of different records. Was that
intentional? Bun B For me, doing a solo album was not so much about getting my own personal views of
the world out there, it was really about trying to touch as many people as I
could. And I have gotten flak for that, because people say, “Well, you didn't
need to make a song with Trey Songz
and Mike Jones and Birdman for the ladies,”
and I said, “Well, I did, because I needed to get my message to Trey Songz
fans, Mike Jones fans and Birdman fans." Same thing with the Ying Yang Twins – I needed to
get my message out to all these people’s individual fan bases: “Free Pimp C,
UGK For Life.” It was important and I wanted as many people as I could get to
hear it. That’s why I ended up on so many albums because I said, “Anybody
that’s working, let me know. I’m open and I really want to get this message
out.” And then I would have people call me, like
Ludacris was like, “Bun, I know what
you are trying to do right now. If you need me for something, let me know.”
Same thing with T.I., like, “Bun, if you
need me for something, let me know,” and T.I. was like, “Come, get on my
album. That way you can really get in touch with my fan base.” A lot of that
was really people offering themselves to the project. I had so many guests
featured because I had so many people wanting to help me keep the UGK name
alive. There is probably two or three songs that we didn’t even use because I
thought, we got 18 features, this might be too much, that is almost a
compilation album now – but that it is just a testament to the love that people
had for Pimp C as well as UGK. Davide Bortot How did it feel when you recorded the album, when you listen to it now? You stressed before that you were really not about touching as many people
as possible or thinking about target groups, but now you actually did that,
and there was a good reason to do it, how did it feel? Bun B I can’t even lie, I was numb through a lot of it. I had a real bad drinking
issue at that time because that was the way I chose to deal with the fact
my best friend was locked up and maybe my career and life was going down the
drain. I hit the bottle, and it was probably one of the lowest points of my
life, literally. I'm ashamed when I look back and I talk with my wife and my
friends about it. You’re looking at a person who was probably drinking a fifth of Hennessy a day, trying to drown myself in the pain. Then every morning I would
wake up, but the pain would still be there, and then you go and try to numb
that shit again, until finally you make a decision to deal with it and get over
it. Because, obviously the liquor ain’t helping and the problem is still
here. You can take the pills, you can take the drugs, you can do whatever you
want, but eventually, when the cloud leaves, the problem is still there and it
is harder to keep that cloud in front of you. To me, as I said, drinking was a
big problem, and I really had to get out of feeling sorry for my fucking
self. There is simply no other way to say it. I was like, “Pimp C is gone, the
group is over.” All this shit. My wife was like, “OK, then get the fuck up and do
whatever it is you need to do. You can’t be playing here, life still goes on.” So I sucked it up, I got in the studio and I surrounded myself with people I knew I
could trust — my manager Red, and I recorded with people that I knew had my
back and people who would tell me that it’s not jamming. That was my main
thing. If I'm going to do an album and Pimp is not here – because Pimp was the
person with the ear, who knew what songs were hitting and what wasn’t. I needed
people whose opinions I could trust. I didn’t need somebody just sit there in
the studio, I needed someone who would not be scared to tell me to come out the
booth: “Just get out here, that's terrible.” Which doesn’t happen that often
because I'm pretty good right now [laughter], but at the time I was very unsure about the
shit and I needed people, honest people, that I knew would give me the
right information and hold me down the right way. Davide Bortot So when the record came out it was this big time for Houston or Texas rap, Mike
Jones and Paul Wall and even Chamillionaire started, so how did that feel for you, the success? Even for a solo album
which was released independently it sold crazy units, it was really a big
success and at that point maybe a success that no one really expected. So,
could you even be happy at that time, looking at the rap scene, what was going
on? Bun B I wouldn’t say happy. I felt like the mission was accomplished. It is
bittersweet. We had a lot of that lately with the UGK legacy. It is hard
to celebrate when the person that you usually celebrate the shit with isn’t
there to celebrate, and my whole thing was trying to get him the album so he
could hear it. How the fuck do I get this album into prison so he could hear
it? I can't get into how he got it but he did eventually get the album – I’m not gon’ snitch or anything like that – and he
listened to it and he was proud of what I did, and that is really all the
confirmation I needed. I appreciated the sales and that’s important, the radio
play and all of that, but at the end of the day I just wanted to make sure I did my homeboy
proud, and then I knew we would be selling records. Davide Bortot There is this one remix on there with all the Houston rappers on it, and when you
look at it, it is just a regular posse cut, everybody doing their thing like a
mixtape rap, it is nothing special – but you can really hear the pride in that.
Is that true? Bun B My whole thing, it’s called the “H Town
Mix,” and my thing was like,
“Paul [Wall], you doing it. Mike [Jones], you doing it. Slim [Thug], you doing it. [Z-]Ro,
you coming up right now. We need to show them this united front, we need to
show them that all of us are here and we doing it big and we gonna
be here for a while.” Not everyone can do that. Slim can call Paul or Mike, but
maybe he can’t call two or three other people. Everybody can’t get everybody, and
I understand I have a certain position in the game where people look up to me.
So if I call on somebody to do something for me it’s not just because I can, I
call them because I have a deeper purpose in mind. I know that just because
we have the light now that doesn’t mean to say it’s going to stay there. And
the best way to keep the movement going was to show a united front because
there is strength in numbers. And that’s what we tried to do on the remix. (music: Bun B feat. Lil' Keke – “Draped Up”) Wow, I don’t even know the last time I heard that shit. That was a big record. Now that I listen to it, I’m really remembering back to when we dropped it. To us, we were thinking we were gonna make a nice little posse cut – but the city
was really, really proud of that record. Houston was like, “That is how we always need to look.” We have been trying hard to look like that ever since but people are people. Nobody is perfect. Davide Bortot From an outside perspective, it was like those two years where Houston was
really big, it was all about Houston, those different styles and all the music
and everything – but suddenly everybody disappeared. Is that something you
agree on from a Texan perspective? Bun B I wouldn’t say disappeared, but it was just the amount of music people were
putting out. You gotta understand that the reason people like Slim Thug, Paul, Mike, and Chamillionaire rose to the fame that they did was because of their musical output. When you look and see these people who seem like they are blowing
up out of nowhere, it’s no coincidence. 50 Cent blew
up because he was putting out the most music and mixtapes. Same thing with the
Dipset, when the Dipset rose to prominence it was because they were making the
most music. That is really what it is about, putting product out for the
people. As the years have gone by and people have got more and more into the
musical experience, and not just listening, but actually understanding the process
of music being recorded, people realise now that it doesn't really take a lot
of time to make a song, per se, and there are so many songs that you could be
putting out for free. For example, anybody that wants to rap to a Beatles
record don’t even consider putting it out for sale because it is not going to
happen. You will never clear it, it will never fucking happen in a million
years. But that doesn't mean you can't make a great song out of a Beatles record
and just give it to the people. All those samples that you know won’t clear,
that’s the perfect way to get your name in the game. Usually, when a song
doesn’t clear it’s because the song is big and the people are real fucking famous and they don’t
want you fucking with their shit, because there is a lot to be gained from it.
So that is the best thing to do, to take these big-ass records – you can't make any
money off of it but that doesn't mean you can't get it to people and they can't
like it, listen to it, jam it and appreciate it and you. You look back two
years ago and the number one album was the
Clipse mixtape. It was music that they
couldn't put out but it was still good music that they made. At the end of the
day that’s really what this is about. None of us is really going to get filthy
fucking rich off this music, but we should at least be trying to have fun with
it. Who the fuck wants to sit around in a studio with a serious motherfucker all the time, someone who is serious and broken and
frustrated? I’m broke and frustrated, that doesn’t mean I’m down all the time. That is the whole point of making this music: have fun, lift yourself up, lift
your spirits and hopefully other people's spirits too, or stop. We shouldn't
all be making Philip Glass
music
and depressing the shit out of everybody. You didn't know Bun B knew about
Philip Glass, did you? [Laughter] Davide Bortot So when Pimp came out of prison in 2005, going from a situation where it
really seemed like it could be the end of the group, to a situation where the group was stronger than ever before, what was your
state of mind when you started working on the next record? Bun B We were just happy, all bullshit aside, we were just ready to make music
together and do what we had been doing for so long. Pimp was a person who I
knew that, since he was about 14 years old, got up every morning and made
music, literally. So when you do that half your life and then one day you wake up
and you can’t make any music at all, it will fuck with your mind. If you
could do anything every day and then all of a sudden they tell you you can’t do it. Like, if your favorite food is potatoes and you eat potatoes every day and then you wake up tomorrow and there is
no more potatoes, there is a mad potato disease and they had to kill all the
potatoes, we can’t eat potatoes ever again. That’ll fuck your head up because
there isn’t a replacement for potatoes if you like potatoes. You can’t eat
cauliflower and eggplant just because it’s white and mushy, that shit’s
not a potato. I just figured that out at the hall in the buffet [laughter]. So I was just so happy that he was home and he was like, “Man, me too, I just want to
make this music again.” We went in the studio, he was trying to go to the
studio the day that he got out of jail. I was like, “No, you need to go take a
bath, you need a good fucking meal, you need to kiss your kids and your wife.
Spend time with your family. Studio is going to be here, it is not going
nowhere.” He was like, “Shit, it just went somewhere for four fucking years.”
I was like, “Wow, touché, my bad. But seriously, give yourself a day or two.” The first song we did when he came home was the “Get Throwed
Remix” that he
rapped on. We sat there and we put the beat on and we looked at each other, and
one thing, when he and I write our rhymes we are in the same room, but we don’t
talk to each other. He’ll be on one sofa and I’ll be on another sofa and
the beat will play and we will write our rhymes. We won’t say anything
about the rhymes until after it is written, but that shit always meshed. We
don’t even understand that. You do you, I do me. For some reason that shit always
made sense together. That was the one thing that we wondered: he’d been in
prison for four years, can we still do that? We sat down, put on the beat, he wrote his rhyme, I wrote mine, and it
made perfect sense in the world, and we looked at each other like, “Let’s
go,” and we just kept making music. That’s why the UGK album ended up being a
double album. We really made like 35 to 40 songs for the album. We were just on a
roll and it was feeling so good, and it was right. It made all the sense in the
world that me and this dude were supposed to make music together, there’s no way
around that shit. When he came home from prison it was something that we
really both started understanding a lot clearer – not just that we make good
music together, but that we were meant to make this music together. And at that
point we were like, “Let’s just fucking make it, let’s just keep making it.
Whatever goes goes, whatever doesn’t, doesn’t. Let’s just make music and at the
end of the day that is what we are supposed to be doing together.” Davide Bortot I understand it worked out well from the first day he came out of prison, but
was it any different from how it was before? Bun B No, not at all, and that’s the funny thing. That’s what we were worried about: is
it going to be different? But after we did that first rhyme we knew it wasn’t
different. In fact, it was going to be even better because we began to
appreciate it more. We knew now what every song meant, not just to us but to
other people. We had a much better understanding of our history, our legacy,
our reputation, and our fan base as well. We knew everything we needed to know
about this group and everything we needed to know about making the music that
this group makes and our connection to the people, so let’s just do it. The
record company was like, “Yes, please, we don’t want anybody on this album.”
We said, “No, we’re still going to put features on the album.” Well, whatever,
let’s just give the people UGK and by that point everybody understood what it
was. Davide Bortot As a musician he didn’t change in those five years, but as a
person did you notice any difference when he came out? Bun B Just more of an intensity. We would talk, I would go and see him like, “Have you been writing?” He’s like, “Have I been writing? I’ve got 400 songs.” Like I say,
when you're a producer you constantly have these songs in your head. I
asked him, “What do you do with all the beats that are in your head?” He’s like,
“I write them out.” I’m like, “How do you write a beat out?” “I just think of
what the drum pattern will be and I make notes to myself. It’s not something
you could read, Bun B, and understand, but it’s some stuff that I can look at it
and realize, yes, that was this song. I know how to put that down on paper so I can
look at it and still make the music.” All the songs that he made and all the
different samples, nobody ever made them. He would have ideas for songs and
samples in the four years that he was gone and nobody did them, and he was able to come back home
and put the same songs out that he had envisioned in prison. Davide Bortot You said before that whenever you started working on an album together you
always try to put together a concept or an overall style for the album. So
hoe would you describe the double album, Underground
Kingz? Bun B First off, it’s kind of crazy ‘cause we waited five albums to do a self-titled
album. But we did that because the name of the group, Underground Kingz, summed up
everything that we had gone through. No one was supposed to be able to come
home after four years and still have a career. No one man was supposed to be able to keep
a group alive. Who goes to prison and comes back bigger? It doesn’t work like
that. So against all the odds and obstacles that people put in on our way, we
surpassed it, we went past the point that everyone said we would end up
stopping at. When Pimp got locked up, all of those people said that was it and
that was going to be the end of it. I kept doing features and everyone
said, “Still, you aren’t going to have a career.” And I did a solo album and
they said, “You've got a little career but it still isn’t UGK.” Then he came
home and we were still UGK. Every time they said we were going to fail we
achieved and succeeded, and that is because we are the Underground Kingz. Every
time somebody thinks they know who we are, we prove them wrong. Every time
someone thinks they have us locked into a spot we have passed that spot, and it’s
because we care more than they hate. Davide Bortot So the “underground,” is that what you mean by that, when you call yourself an
underground king nowadays? You’re not underground in a classic, narrow sense,
but is that what you mean by that, standing up for yourselves? Bun B Even when you say we still wouldn’t be considered underground, we still rep
for the underground, and we are here as an example of how far an underground
artist can go. So just getting into the game, there are so many levels to
success within this music industry that you can achieve. I still haven’t made
a platinum album and there are people who come out their first time, many people
who probably don't even like what they are doing, and they go two, three times
platinum, so there are still levels of success that this group is trying to
achieve, so for us we’re still the underdogs. I use Jermaine
Dupri as an example of where I
want to go with my life because Jermaine Dupri is my age, but Jermaine
Dupri is worth probably about 100 times more than I am because I am not doing
it like that. He is really, really rich but he’s my age, and I keep thinking
to myself, “What the fuck am I not doing? Am I not working hard enough?” It is
not so much equating myself successfully with him, it is a matter of thinking, as much as I think
I’m doing, there is somebody who’s been the game
no longer than me but has managed to get further than me, so maybe I should
still be trying a little harder. No matter who you are in life, never think
that you've got it because just when you think you've got it somebody will
walk right past you with it, and you are like, “Goddamn, he’s got it.” And then
you're forced with a choice of, do I hate him or do I go do my thing? And I think the
answer is obvious. Davide Bortot Having a number one album, did that mean anything to you? Our generation grew
up listening to chart shows on the radio and it was always about who is number
one, it was important. Was it like that for you as well? Bun B At that point, yes, because we understood the game a little bit better. We
understood that, you know what, there are enough people that fuck with UGK that if this record
drops on the right day, and if, say, Mariah
Carey or Celine Dion or Tim
McGraw, somebody that usually
sells five or six [hundred] thousand albums the first week, if nobody like that comes out, we might
actually have a shot at having the number one album in the country. And for
us, once again, we are from Port Arthur, Texas, a little bitty town, and it would
have meant the world to them. A lot of times when you are an entertainer, or a
person of influence, or whatever it maybe, lots of people tend to live their
lives vicariously through you, and they take your success as their success. So
with us being from Port Arthur, when another kid from Port Arthur sees us and thinks, “If
UGK can do that then I can too,” that kind of shit is important. For us,
to have the number one album in the country, from where we’re from it meant
everything, because it is that much more inspiration to a lot of people who
don’t really have a lot to be inspired by. And I think that is really at the
core of UGK, what we were trying to get across is to inspire the uninspired. Like, man, I know it’s fucked up where you are at and I know
there is not a lot going on, but if you really want to have something in life
you can have it. Right there in a little-ass town, you can have it. Davide Bortot So if the Underground Kingz record represents the essence of the group, do
you think there is one song that represents the essence as well, one essential
tune off the record? Bun B There are several. This is an album where we said we weren't going to leave
anything out on the album. We want to talk about family, relationships,
religion, the way we look at the world, the way the world looks at us, we want
to be very, very real about this, and a lot of songs represent that. Some
songs represent that. “Live This Life.” “Lord, I’m Just A G.” A lot of
people who are in the streets doing different shit, they think about a lot of
things. If you are a criminal, you live your life doing criminal shit,
late at night when you are at home you wonder how God looks at you. You wonder,
if you have done so much wrong, will God forgive you and let you into heaven?
You know you're a good person, but you’ve done a lot of bad shit, and when you really
know how it works, God forgives everybody for everything regardless and you
are still looking at life from the point of a man. That is the kind of shit
that we know young cats in the street have issues with. Like, “I'm trying to do this and I know
it’s wrong. I’m doing it because it seems like it’s the only thing I can do,
and will people forgive me when this is over?” So there is a lot of shit like
that. We did a record with Ronald
Isley that didn't make this album
that I felt represented everything that had to be said about UGK, but it’ll be
on the next album, which is getting ready to come out. Davide Bortot Do you have it with you? Bun B Do I have it with me? No. Is Corey in here? My engineer is with me, he might have it. Even though he
won’t admit it, he probably got it all in his computer listening to it at
night when I tell him to leave that shit at the studio. ‘Cause we all love music, there is no
way anybody in here, anybody who gets new music cannot not play it to
somebody – you’ve got to, and he has probably got all of that shit but he
wouldn’t tell me because he knows not to play that shit in front of me.
But, on the
Underground Kingz album, probably “The Game Belongs To Me.” Because that’s
how we felt and that is how I still feel. (music: UGK – “The Game Belongs To
Me”) That shit be crazy to listen to, I might be in the minority but I don’t listen
to myself. Does anybody around here listen to the music you make? Ride around
listening to yourself? I’m not talking about when you’re making it and you put
it in, you want to hear how it sounds, maybe play it to somebody else for an
opinion, but I just can’t sit around listening to myself. And I have been with
people, I won’t name names, but that is what they do. They get in the car,
they put their CD in, turn that shit up, put the windows down, lean out the
window, like, “It’s me!” “Jesus, you really like you, don’t you? I hope other
people like you because it seems really important.” Davide Bortot So why don’t listen to your own music? It’s not interesting or it bores you,
or do you not like your voice? Bun B I’m not into me like that. Davide Bortot But the game belongs to you? Bun B I don’t sit around reminding myself, I know what it is, I'm cool. I’m still a fan of
music more than being an artist. I will always consider myself a fan of music
more so than an artist, because I listen to music more than I record music.
That is just me personally, so I’m always listening to whatever the new shit
is. If I can’t find some new shit, I start playing old shit again. Not me, I’m
not too keen on me. It seems a little facetious to me to sit around listening
to yourself all day, like, “Really, that’s what you do? Why don’t you just carry a mirror around
and look at yourself all day too?” Davide Bortot Talking about new shit, I think what really sets you apart from other rappers
that have your status is that you still always work with people that might not
have that much of a big name or a big budget or whatever. On the Underground
Kingz record there is a Dizzee Rascal
song and you were featured
on his record too. Is it important for you to help people? You are like some
sort of legitimizer, you know, you rap on people’s records and from then on it's like, “He has Bun on his records, it must be good.” Is it important to help in their
career, or is it that you just like them as artists and want to work with them? Bun B It’s a little bit of both. I listen to a lot of music and you know when
somebody has got it. You can listen to these cats and think, “Yo, this guy is hot, this boy is bad, he’s a real fucking good artist, and I hope that the game don’t
fuck him up.” Because that is what happens to a lot of young, talented people,
is that the game will chew you up and spit you out or frustrate you to where
you don’t even want to be a part of it. A lot of times, as an artist, there is
nobody to talk to because nobody really understands the situation. You can't
go to your friends that don’t make music and tell them, “I’ve got this music
and I just want to get it out. You don’t understand I need to get this out to
the people, I need them to feel this, and to hear this and see this.” A lot of
times you aren’t able to talk to about this stuff. Me, if it wasn’t for Too
$hort or E-40 or J.
Prince I don’t know where I would
be today. If it wasn’t for these people taking the time to listen to me
complain about different shit, I wouldn’t be here
today, I wouldn’t have a career today. For me, I felt it was only right
to be that person to people that Too $hort and E-40 were for me. If I hear a
cat I think is talented, I’ll call them and let them know, “Whenever you start
going through some shit, because you are going to go through some shit, give me
a call.” A lot of times, like right now, because I have been with my wife for ten
years, we’ve been married for five, so most of the young rappers who are getting
engaged or are ready to get married, they pretty much call me because they want
to know how you balance a career with the family. When money gets fucked up
and contracts ain’t right they call me because they know I had a fucked up
contract and was able to work above that. That is why we try and be honest
with it, so that when people have the same problems that we have, they have
somebody that they can come to. Some people I just call and tell them, “Look, you
are going through some shit, I know what you’re going through, you fell out with the management, you went over here.” They are
like, “How did you know all this?” And I say, “It happened to me twice. It is
no big deal, you are going to get over this.” But a lot of time when you are in
this stuff you can't see past it. They say you can’t see the forest for the
trees. And it is important to call, say, Killer
Mike and them say, “Just keep your head
up, G. And if you don't understand some shit, just call me and I will try and
talk you through as best way I can." Davide Bortot So, inspiring other artists and helping them along the way, is
that the main reason why it is still “UGK For Life,” even after Pimp C’s death?
I can’t even imagine how it feels if your partner in the group dies, after
all you had been through together. Is that the main reason that you want to keep
up the group’s name and keep doing what you are doing, just to show other
people the way and what is possible? Bun B My thing is that you can tell people all you want, you can talk to friends
until your tongue falls out, but it’s only when they see you doing what you
say that they really understand what you mean or give you credit for it. Me, I
could talk all day but I’d rather lead by example and prove the point by action.
I try to keep integrity out front as much as possible. I tell every artist,
“If you have no integrity, you have nothing. Your friends will leave, your
money will leave, your fame, everything will leave that is not built on
integrity. That is the foundation of every artist. Whatever you are true to,
be true to that.” With UGK 4 Life… UGK in the last few years few years, especially
after Pimp went to prison and came home, we both came to the understanding
that UGK is bigger than just the two men in the group, and it means a lot to
people — what we have been through, what we represent, the length of time that
we’re in there doing what we do. The fact that people have been supporting us,
for one financially – all my bills and everything like that are paid
because people come to my shows, buy my music, or other artists who like me buy
verses off of me, and that is how I take care of my family. There is an
appreciation for my art and an appreciation for those that appreciate my art. And you just have to keep it real with people
nowadays. This world is very real and it doesn't matter if you are Bun B, shit
will still fuck you up, you can still get crossed out in this game, you just
need to know how to persevere and fight through this shit. A lot of people, I
can tell them, you probably will have a bad run, but it might not be as rough
as mine. If I can make it through this shit and UGK can still be here, then
anybody can do it, and that is what UGK really means. Anybody can be an
underground king. Most people in this world are underdogs, but that doesn’t
mean you are going to stay an underdog. Don’t let the fact that people don’t
appreciate you today stop you from being who you want to be tomorrow, you have
to keep that in mind. Davide Bortot After Pimp went to jail, it was hard for you. You said you were
sitting around for 18 months not knowing what to do, but now the situation is
even harder, it seems to be completely different. Is that something you learned
from that situation? Bun B Absolutely. If we had not had the “Free Pimp C” movement, with Pimp going to
prison, we would not have known that we could persevere through his death, if we
had not persevered through his imprisonment. We look back now and realize that
with him being locked up it was a test for me. It was to test the people
around me and the people who have been working with this group for so long.
Can you do it by yourself? I didn’t understand it then but it makes all the
sense in the world now, that unfortunately I was going to have to continue
this by myself. Now we all know that I am capable of doing it by myself so I
just have to make sure that I am based right, make sure that I keep focus and
know what the purpose is and just have the right people around me. People know
that we can do it because unfortunately we’ve had to do that before. Davide Bortot The whole responsibility thing that you were talking about, being influential
to young artists and helping them, does that go beyond career issues or music
business issues? Do you feel some responsibility in other respects, too, when
it comes to politics? Bun B Absolutely. Just because I make music does not mean that I am not beholden
to the same laws that everyone else is in my community. And it is important
that I show people that I care about the same things everyone else in my
community cares about. It is important for me because I am a parent and I am
also going to be a grandparent next week, which sounds crazy — I’m 35 years old
and going to be a grandfather, don't go there. But it is important that people
understand that I am still a person. I still pay taxes, still have to vote,
the shit that is going on in my community still affects me. Even if it doesn't
affect me directly, I can’t sit back and let them fuck over you, even if I have
got to the point where they can’t necessarily fuck over me. At the same time
I have to understand that because I have more, I have more to lose as well. At the end of
the day, being a human being, I have responsibilities to the world, I have to
show compassion for people that don’t have what I have. I have to show concern
for people being mistreated around the world. I like to call myself a person
of influence. I wouldn’t say I was a role model, but people are certainly
influenced by things I say and do, so I have to make sure it is not always bad
shit that I am saying and doing. You have to equalise the effect. I understand
I’ve made some records in my time that have some raw, raunchy, “Wow, did he
really say that?” type of shit. Probably 80% of the shit I made I wouldn’t
dare play in front of my mother. My mom has my first album and if I took it
right now and put it in the tape deck it would pick up from the second part.
The first album comes on and says “Pimp C, bitch!” and that is all she
heard. She put it in and said, “I want to hear what you're all doing,” and she
heard “Pimp C, bitch,” and said, “Cut that! Get that away from me!” [Laughter] Saying all
that, I do feel the right, or the need rather, to get involved with certain
things. Of course, politically, I inspire people so I should inspire people to
get involved with the voting process. I try to be as fair as possible and not
tell people who to vote for. It is important to get people involved with the
process because a lot of times, especially in America in the inner city and in the
hood, they don’t even approach us about voting until it is a presidential
election. But keep in mind that there is a lot of state shit that goes on,
city shit, local community shit, even in your respective community they may be
passing laws about the school or a dress code, or you can’t keep the music loud
after 10 o’clock, shit like that. And if you don’t know about these things and you
are not registered to vote on it, people will always be making decisions for
you. So that is what I have been trying to do, get people involved with the
process so they can start having a say. I tell people all the time, “Do you
know you can go to your senator’s office any time you want and talk shit?” If
you don’t like some shit your representative is doing, you can go to his office
and say, “Where the hell is the senator? They said they would fix my street
out there three years ago, I pay your taxes, I voted for you, where is he?”
You have the right to do that when you vote. But most people who complain don’t do shit about it, they just like to complain, and it’s time they stop talking and
start doing and I know that I can get people energised. If I say Benz is the
new car, people going to buy Benz. So if I say that voting is the new shit,
maybe they will go out and vote and try and make the process easy. I try to
get people involved with the world. Too many people are just looking at the
world letting it go by, being fucked up. Take charge, that is what’s wrong,
that’s why the world is fucked up, because there are so many people who just
don’t want to do anything about what is going on and I’m just trying to light
a fire under some asses right now. Davide Bortot So with the situation right now where everybody seems to feel like he needs to
have the Obama mixtape or whatever, do you still think it is a good thing? In
the end, it’s not like those rappers who represent Obama make people think
about it, they make the decision for them, but do you still think it is a good thing? Bun B It is good to get people involved and Obama is the first candidate… Davide Bortot But do they get people involved? Bun B Here’s the thing. Say, for example, I am a gold artist. Gold in America means
I have sold 500,000 records. So if I say, “Vote!” does that mean 500,000
people are going to vote Obama? Fuck, no. Those people like different things,
some people like the style, some like the music, some people like the content,
some people might like the whole package. It is just to try and get people
involved with it. But that being said, we have had a lot of people jump on the bandwagon
and make songs about Obama who don’t know his policies and any of that stuff,
and a lot of people who like Obama today are not going to like him no more
when he’s president. Everybody always has some issues at some point with the
standard president, and a lot of people are just jumping on the bandwagon and
joining the hype. But I speak to cats all the time who are like, “Yo, Obama
for president.” “OK, so you’re going to vote?” “No, I mean I’m down with him,
I’m running with him.” “What does that mean, you’re down with him? He isn’t
just going to win, do you think he’s won already?” You’ve got to get in the
game. A lot of people are so separate from the process they don’t even understand it. We have to get people involved. Davide Bortot So what is happening right now, will it change anything? The election has not
even happened and still Obama is this pop culture icon who everyone seems to
like, and when he came to Europe everybody was crazy about it, hundreds of
thousands of people showed up to hear him speak. Do you think some kind of
change is already going on? Bun B Absolutely, and I say this to a lot of people: it is not just that Obama is black,
it is because he is different. I just think he inspires hope, he looks
different from everything that comes before him. Every president before Barack Obama —
possibly with the exception of Clinton and Kennedy, but for the most part — most of them pretty much look like the ones before. If you put up a picture of
George Bush and put up a picture of George Washington, there is not much of a
difference, about six inches, they pretty much look like the same motherfucker.
He could have been George Washington’s great-grandson, or great-great-great-great grandson. America has always said it is the melting
pot, it has always said that we are open to all these different cultures and
all these different races and all these different whatever you say. We welcome
everybody, but the country has never reflected that. For the first time we have
a candidate that actually reflects what America looks like. Like I said, he
could have been Hispanic, he could have been Asian, he could have been European, but
the fact is that he is different. The world is so fucked up and people are
so disenfranchised about everything, family, friends, economy, house, car,
everything is fucking people up, and nothing anyone says makes people feel the
slightest bit better until Barack talks. It is sincere and it is genuine and if
it is not, he is the best liar God put on this planet, point blank. I honestly
believe that he wants change. Can he actually make a change? With our help,
yes, he can. But he cannot do it alone, we have to support the man beyond the
election and we had to hold him to his shit. That is the main thing, don’t
just vote for Barack — this is for my people who are probably going to see this
online or whatever — don’t just vote for the man because everybody else is and
then when he’s elected say, “OK, we are going to be good now.” We have got to
make sure that he makes good on his promises. We have to hold him to the
standard that he is putting up there. Davide Bortot Don’t you think it is pretty sure that it will come to a point he has to make a decision
he doesn’t want to take or goes against what he says now? Isn’t that in the
nature of being president, and could that even be a bigger problem? Like, when
George Bush was president not too many people expected too much and he was
just another president, but if now some person steps up and everyone has this
high expectation and are really expecting them to change the whole world, don’t you
think it would be even more of a problem if he cannot really do that? Bun B That is the thing, it is not that we expect him to change the world. He is
just one man, he is only as powerful as the country he represents. And it’s
not just the President of America, it is Americans as well, we have to believe
in his message of change and be prepared to go out and start making a change.
We as citizens have to help him make America a better country, we have to out
start looking out for our fellow man more, we have to be more environmentally conscious, we have to be more understanding to other peoples and cultures and
lifestyles. This is what we have to do as Americans to help America make a
great country again. He is a president who wants to help us do this, he is the
person that is inspiring us to be better people. And McCain will only make
people feel worse about the state of the world that they are living in now,
“OK, great, four more years of Bush, this world is going to shit. Why should I
go to work? Why should I give a fuck any more?” And Barack is telling people
that this country can be great again if we believe it, but we don’t believe it
when the other guy’s talking. Davide Bortot So it is more about motivation than actual politics? So Young
Jeezy could be president? Bun B I hope so, it would be a reflection of the inner cities of America. The thing
in America is that anyone is supposed to be able to become president. The fact
that a president’s son became president kind of fucked that message up for
people and it made it seem like this shit was an inside job. He has no
qualifications to be president other than the fact his daddy was president.
That’s alumni shit, what the fuck is that? People are just tired of the same
old shit and they are tired of this guy getting this guy in, and everybody that
has the power and influence in America, there are all helping each other. It
is the top 3% of the world running everything else and it is no different in
America than anywhere else and people are just tired of it. We are a
democracy, the people are supposed to run this shit. But we haven't had
representation to tell us, “Hey, you are supposed to be telling me what to do,
you’re supposed to be doing it.” Now we do. Until then it has been, “Trust me
and I know what’s good for you,” and now Barack is telling us to trust in
ourselves, that is the difference. Davide Bortot So that is very similar to what you are doing, right? In a way, that is the
same words you used when you are talking about your first album? Bun B You brought that shit around, didn’t you? If you say so, I don’t ride around
with a mirror to my face. I am trying to inspire lyricists to make better
music and be better people because I know how we get looked at a lot and it is
time to start changing the perception of a lot of stuff. If I could be hip-hop’s Barack — shit, yeah, I am with that. They can make all the songs about me
they want. Davide Bortot I think this might be a good point to ask if we have any questions? Participant Hi, I’m Michael from Israel. You said that back in
the day, when hip-hop just started out in the South, you would listen to a lot
of the shit that was going on in New York and the West Coast – but how did the
people producing hip-hop rapping in the South come up with the distinctive sound? With the slow tempos and the whole style? Because it is a distinctive musical style in hip-hop, it is not just trying to
do something else. Bun B If you look at New York, New York is a city where most immigrants come into
the country, so a lot of what goes on in New York is very international, it is
very cosmopolitan. There is a lot of influences from a lot of places and a lot
of people. Rap is basically disco music mixed with Jamaican DJ sounds, put
together. So that is the influence on the East Coast. The West Coast has more
of a rock tinge to it, a lot of guitars and stuff like that because most of
the music coming out of L.A. and being made in that area is rock-based. In the
South, most of us in the South, our parents listened to blues, a lot of
gospel, most Southern producers are heavily influenced by gospel, blues and
early R&B. We pretty much made a lot of the music we listened to. For a
long time we didn’t really notice it, but now that we are more cognizant of
it, we try to put as much influence into it as we can, just to give our music
more of its own personal distinction. Also jazz, a lot of people don't know
that a lot of the Southern artists — because they think we're stupid — listen to
a lot of jazz music, and there is a lot of influence in that. Not so much the
sampling of jazz, but more the instrumentation. Southern artists, more than
artists of any other region, use live instrumentation in their music, and a lot
of that comes from the fact that most musicians are from the South, there’s a
guitar player everywhere you look. There is a certain thickness when you
listen to Southern music, there is a thickness in it that comes from the
strings of the guitar, the strings of the bass guitar, the keys on the piano —
it is a different sound and that basically comes from the music that we
listened to coming up. Davide Bortot Don’t you think it has a lot to do with how and where people are listening to
music? When you are from New York you listen to music on the subway and on
your iPod or whatever. You mentioned before that Texas is so big that you need cars,
and then you listen to the music when you're in a car, and the same goes for L.A.. I
think that is a huge influence on how music sounds? Bun B I could agree with that, definitely. Then again, you have to be careful about
that, too, because you almost want to say that a lot of East Coast music isn’t
bass-influenced. But a lot of the early hip-hop was
808s, the Marley
Marl records had a lot of bass
because they were making music for the park, actually to be played outside.
But I do understand the philosophy of living in a city where most of your
transportation is public so you have to condense whatever you are doing to
your own personal space, hence the iPod and personal computers and things like
that. So, I totally understand that and I do believe that has an influence in
it, because why would you put a lot of bass in your music for people who aren’t
going to listen to it with a big stereo? That being said, you can buy some
headphones now that sound like a goddamn car when you put them on. Some of
that Skull Candy shit, I can’t even put that shit
on my ears because it is too goddamn loud. Davide Bortot I know that Jay-Z has a theory that a good song has to work on the most shitty
speakers ever, and if it doesn't work on those speakers, it is not a good song.
So what is your take on that, coming from a Southern perspective? Bun B That is absolutely, positively, 100% true. When you go in the studio on these
big control rooms with all these monitors and these big-ass woofers, it
doesn’t matter what shit you play, that shit sounds good. I don’t give a fuck
how good the shit is, if you play it loud enough on the right stereo, that
shit sounds great. But then you take that shit and translate it to another
form and it doesn’t work at all. One thing we do, and a lot
of people do this: you take whatever you do in studio and you go
to the little battery-operated CD player with one little speaker and a tape
deck and you play it, not on some Blaupunkt shit, I’m
talking some cheap-ass Walmart $30 boombox, and if that shit jams on that, it
is going to jam on anything. And that is as true as it is. If it doesn't make
sense on there, because the majority of people aren’t listening to music in
big houses and stereos and cars, they are listening to it on little shitty-ass
radios at home. Participant Hi, I am Sarah from London, which is why I wanted to ask you about the Dizzee
Rascal collaboration, how you first heard about him, and what it was that he
did that made you want to do a track together? Bun B I met Dizzee Rascal at South By Southwest, I would
probably say about five years ago, through the guy who books the rap acts at
South By Southwest. He said, “I’m bringing this dude from London. This dude is
hard.” I said, “London? I never really heard a London MC.” So he played “Fix
Up Look Sharp” for me and I was like,
“This shit is hard, this dude got some real breath control.” Then when he came and
performed and I saw him doing some real grime shit, like some real high-speed, crazy-ass shit, I was like, “This motherfucker is a problem.” Then I
talked to him and it was a whole other story when I talked to him. Dizzee Rascal, in my opinion — and I want to make sure I say this right — I have never
met a person anywhere in the world in any class of life doing anything that
understands people as well as Dizzee Rascal does. It has got a lot to do with
his own personal experience and the life that he has led, but he really gets it.
He understands… I know this may sound crazy, but he understands everything.
When I talk to him about shit he has such a grasp on everything, and this kid
is like ten years younger than me! I was really impressed. When I met the
kid, he was probably 19 or 20 years old, and most kids at 20 years old, when they’re the shit, they don’t give a shit about being anything other than the
shit. When I was 20 years old, I didn’t give a fuck, I was
the shit. But this dude has compassion for other people. He goes to these
other countries but he doesn't just perform and take money, he really looks at
what is going on, with people's conditions and shit like that, and I really just
ended up having a lot of respect for the young kid. We were friends for three
years before we even went in the studio together. It was like, we felt we needed to do a
song because where you’re at, and where I’m at in the game, we just need to come together
and show a connection. Southern music and grime music have so many
parallels, in the delivery of the vocals and the production of the music, the tempo, the
energy of the artists as well as the energy of the crowd. And it was
all about just being true. A lot of times rappers meet each other and that’s the first thing they say: “Let’s do a song.” But they very seldom do the
song. I don’t even pay attention to that shit any more. “Take my number, we’ll
hook it up.” Whatever, you know they’re going to change the number on Monday
anyway. But he just really intrigued me, how could this young kid know so much
about everything? And when I got to talk to him, it was just the life that he
has led. Unfortunately he has been privy to a lot of shit in his life, but he
didn’t let it bring him down like a lot of people I know, who will let the stuff
that they’ve been through make them. Whatever you have been
through, it doesn't define what you are. Just because
you’re from somewhere, you are who
you want to be, and you go as far as you want to go in life. He’s a real good
example of that, and I wish he could get the success in America that he gets in
London so that people could understand him as a person, because I think if
people got the chance to know him as a person, it would take him so much
further in this game. But sometimes we get locked into our artist identity and
you don’t get the chance to let people know the real you. And also he’s a good-ass rapper, that’s why we did a song together. Participant I am Reggie from Australia. In Australia, we get UGK records and that is it. So
we've got East [Coast] music and the West [Coast] music and just recently people are starting
to get a bit more into the South. And where I am from in Perth, Australia,
sometimes we have discussions about how maybe there is a tension or animosity
between the East and the South or the West. Do you connect with many people from the East? I see that you
collaborated with Jay-Z? Bun B I have a lot of friends on the East Coast. I hear a lot of talk about there
being problems with the East and the South and it is really only the media
trying to pump things up. Most of the people on the East Coast and
the South, when we see each other, we kick it, have fun, smoke, drink, whatever
else they do, pop pills or whatever the fuck, everybody does that shit. We
have way more in common than we do differences. The only time I see any kind
of iffy behavior is around award time, and that is just natural. That has
nothing to do with music. I am sure when the Oscars come
around, whoever is nominated is not crazy about the other people either, no
matter how you act socially. “I respect all the nominees and I'm just happy to
be nominated” and all that shit. That's bullshit. If you get nominated you want to win, that’s
why we do things. We do it for people to acknowledge these things. I’m sure
there is a couple of artists in the East Coast who didn’t like the success the
South is getting, but I’m sure there was also people in the South who didn’t
like it when the East Coast was on top. The reality is that no region gets to
claim this. At some point Australia will get the crown and everyone is
going to have to roll with it. Nobody is going to be the shit forever, and if
you are in the mind that “once I am the shit,” you already lost. It is a
baton passing. The music industry and all this shit is just a relay race. I
get my chance on the top and people stop fucking with me, they start fucking
with you. I pass you the baton and you get your run, then you pass the baton. What tends to happen is that some people try to hold on to the baton too long,
and somebody has got to come and take it from you – then you don't get it back. But if you can willingly say, “Hey, he is doing his thing and I’m just going to
fall back and let him have it,” a lot of times they will honour that respect
and they’ll be the people to bring you back. But if you shit on the next person coming
up... Because you see everybody in life twice: once on the way up and once on the
way down. So how you treat people the first time will be how they treat you
the second time. A lot of times, I had East Coast artists front
on me when I was first coming up. Do I take that as a reason to just hate all
East Coast artists? Fuck, no! Maybe just this dude was a dick. There are some
dicks in the South too. There is bullshit music where I’m from, and there is some
bullshit music where you are from in Australia, that is the reality of the
world. But there is also some real good shit, too, and there is no need to be a
bitch about it. Just give everybody their due credit. And even when it was the East and West, it really was just
this dude didn't like this dude, it was nothing personal about the region, it
was just, “this dude is a dick.” Anybody else? It looks like that may be it. [Applause]

---

Title: Daniel Wang
Date: 2015-04-20
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/danny-wang-knock-knock-balihus-there/

Daniel Wang
Daniel Wang makes and plays gleaming, disco-influenced music that draws inspiration from early house and techno. Born in California, he spent seven years of his childhood in Taiwan before heading to New York to work in instrument and record shops. Sick of the changes to the city’s artistic scenes post 9/11 he quit the States for Berlin in ’03 and hasn’t looked back. Wang takes his music seriously. He used to be obsessed with making a good bassline and is now concerned with structure and composition. Wholesale sampling and loops are serious no-no’s, ruling most hip-hop and techno out of bounds.
In his lecture at the 2006 Red Bull Music Academy, Daniel Wang talks magic, mathematics and movement.
Hosted by Gerd Janson How many people here are actually familiar with Mr. Daniel Wang? Daniel Wang I don’t expect everyone to know me. I’m not a superstar. Gerd Janson If you have the slightest interest in disco music, you might have come across his label, Balihu Records, which means what? Daniel Wang It was actually nonsense. A ballyhoo means in English, a big commotion, like a big noise. It’s actually nonsense. When I made the label everything about it’s spiritual grooves, deep house. I just wanted to avoid patching without even meaning to. It should be kind of nonsense. Ever since disco was invented. How many words do we have now for what we call dancing? Trip-hop. Two step. Drum & bass. The point of all of this is the possibilities of music over a four-four beat. Daniel Wang It's been that way for about 100 years actually. Blues was music over 4-4 beat, rock is, bassanova is. I wanted to not attach, say, this is house, you know? I just use the word disco lot because, when this was all invented, about 1973 officially is the proper birth date of disco, “Love Is the Message,” that's the whole Philly sound. “Gamble and Huff,” if you're familiar with it. We're playing with that same idea since that time for the past 33 years or so. It's been called disco since that time, it was a much more open word back then. It's kind of like the Tower of Babel, where everything split apart and went into different genres. But obviously, like a big tree, they go back to the same root. We're going to have lots of very corny metaphors here today. I apologize. Gerd Janson Didn't you start Balihu back then initially to get DJ gigs? Daniel Wang Yeah, I realized the only way in 1993 anybody would get a gig, I mean this is 1993, Danny Tenaglia and Junior Vasquez... Gerd Janson We're talking about New York right? Daniel Wang We're talking about New York. I still I feel this way, nobody needs an openly homosexual Chinese-American DJ pop star. I still don't think it's ever going to happen, and that's OK. I'm happy to do my own thing. I realized the only way to get any attention and to say OK, here is somebody who obviously knows something about disco or house music is make a record, you know. I just took all the records, I took 17 samples. Because everybody was a sampling at the time, and strung them together and made a parody record of, “OK, here's my idea if you were to sample all of the old disco records.” Of course, the joke was you couldn't recognize a single one. Well, you could recognize about three out of 17. There was this sort of joke on it, if anybody recognizes all these records, I'll give you a trip to Paris or something. Eventually one person named a few samples. Gerd Janson But not all. Daniel Wang Not all. Gerd Janson Maybe shall we show one of your early tracks? Daniel Wang All right. What should we do about the DVD? Gerd Janson Oh you want to show the little piece? Daniel Wang Let's do this little introduction first, for five minutes, then, slightly sentimental, but since we spent three hours yesterday talking about what somebody did in the bedroom at the age of 18, we can spend five or six minutes and watch a poetic lovely video of a Hans Christian Andersen fairy tale about music. And life, and other things. Then we'll come back to the proper topics here. (video: unknown) OK, I think that's it. Just a simple comment and opinion on the current state of music. Gerd Janson So this is where we are today? The sweet music disappeared and now the machines took over? Daniel Wang Yeah. It's actually quite amazing, because I think the tale was written 1880 or something, when did Hans Christian... Google? Anyone have their computer on? When did Hans Christian Andersen live? Gerd Janson I think about ... Daniel Wang 1880, I think. And this is actually the beginning already of mechanical music. Let's talk a little history now. I've been living in Berlin for the last three years, and there's these amazing machines from about 1900 to 1910, we're talking, in fact I can draw them for you. Now this becomes practical. Here's another question. If anyone has the answer for this, Chinese bells, what are they for? From 2,800 years ago? The answer will be revealed later in this lecture. But in Germany, if you go, there's these huge things, and they look like this. Gerd, have you seen these things? Gerd Janson I don't think so. Daniel Wang They're actually in, they're also in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London if you go. Just imagine this is covered with dots, these things were from about 1900, and they're actually like the first of the mechanical hand crank things. They're huge. They're this big, or they can be this big, and people already had dance parties, I'm talking DJ dance parties, in 1900 to 1910 using large mechanical wheels. There's even a strange woman in East Germany. She was a transsexual east German in the ’60s who went from becoming a man to a woman, and she collected these things. She had thousands of them, and they were in this archive in East Germany. I've yet to see these, but I'm told they exist, and a lot of them lost. Again, this DJ thing, going back over 100 years already, and the invention of mechanical music also goes back 100 years, so yes. I think we're in a state of mechanical music having almost completely replaced, yeah... Gerd Janson Sweet music? Daniel Wang Organic, human played music. Gerd Janson Maybe we should show them what you did as you started out. Daniel Wang All right, so this is how Gerd and I got to know each other. You know what, let's do an overview, because I don't want to give you the impression that I'm going to sit here for three hours and talk about what I do. In fact, this whole talk, I hope, will be about ten minutes now. Five minutes about myself, and the rest, can we open the thing please? Let's take an overview. Alright, if you go to the second page, some things to think about. The first things that came to mind were, it's personal opinion again. It's perfectly all right to be asocial and it's OK not to like or buy stuff. We're all here, and we want to be polite, we want to be nice to each other, and lots of people here, I think, almost everybody here is talented and has something to say. If I were running this camp, I'd almost want to say turn off the computer, turn off the mobile, and turn off the email, MySpace especially. Because music, people who really concentrate on music, does anyone know Erik Satie? We all know our Erik Satie right? [sings melody from Gymnopédie No. 1] Yes, famous theme? Does anyone know how he died? He lived alone in a room for 15 years, and when he died, he was covered in old newspapers and umbrellas, because he was so afraid that every time he went out, he was afraid of rain or something like that. He collected old umbrellas. You know how he actually made music right? Why he started making ambient music? Because there was too much loud accordion music in the cafes. I was thinking this yesterday, when the radio show was blasting out over the speakers during dinner, he simply wanted quieter music so he could digest his food. There's actually been studies by the American military in the ’50s and ’60s that say loud music actually disturbs digestion and is not good for your health. I really wanted to put on some Satie during dinner yesterday. Number two, why we're here, what we're going to explain in a minute. Just as a painter cannot use only one color and straight lines to paint, it's really about expanding our minds, understanding chords and melodies and harmonies, and also tone palette, which we'll get into a little bit. Let's see, I'm going to jump down a bit here. I think maybe what always scared me most of all about modern music is the amount of force that it entails. I mean, you're talking about 120 dB's of sound coming at you. We kind of live in a “might makes right” world right now, with George Bush running things and everything. Whoever has the biggest bomb wins, but I don't think that should be the case, and you probably don't either. Might should not make right, especially with music. But like it or not, even with so many DJs talking about peace and love and world whatever, I think they follow exactly the same principle. Whatever's loudest and thickest and fattest is what cuts through, and the rest doesn't really matter. Frankly, it’s a great way to destroy everything that's great around you. Probably the thing that bothers me most of all is things like MTV. As we all know, music has been going downhill probably, since about early ’80 s. It's exactly when MTV came in. This is when the picture and propaganda replaced music. More often that not – almost always – music is basically marketed toward a social group. It's saying, "You're gay; you listen to this music. You're black; you listen to this music. You're white; you listen to this music." MTV has enforced that. No matter what, we can't avoid it, even in what we do, thinking, "This is right." Looking at music as a pure, I don't want to say as a pure mathematical or scientific phenomenon, but in the ’60s and ’70s, there were no such distinctions. Everybody listened to disco. It all came together, Latin music, Salsa, percussion, rock, blues, classical, it was all there. There was really no distinction. The idea that there should be any distinction is purely a marketing ploy trying to separate people. This might be totally obvious, but we have to start with this premise. At any point in the lecture if anyone says, "Oh that's not black music. That's not real," or, "Oh, you know that's not a proper classical transition. Bach would never have played that." I think we have to throw that out. We have to throw out those pre-conceives. So, thinking this, I started making records, and this is how Gerd and I met. What are we supposed to hear now? Here's something that... This is not necessarily something I'm proud of. This is maybe something I produced that you'd like. Gerd Janson Yeah, that I like, and that you did at a very early stage. I think you're pretty dissatisfied these days with what you did back in the day. Daniel Wang Right. Let's just say the first few records, I just sampled a lot of stuff. I just took the things that I liked. I didn't know what I was doing. I'd done a theory course in college, but I never learned to apply it. People say often there's a ten-year rule. You start out doing something, about ten years later, you'll come to the revelation of how all the knowledge that you've acquired actually applies to what you do. It takes a while, actually. I mean, with me, I only feel like, after 12 or 13 years, it's really coming together. Now, a technical difficulty. Any questions or comments so far? Audience Member Do you get a lot of flack for your opinion? Daniel Wang Actually, less and less. I can't even believe I'm here, and people are giving me a chance to speak to so many people. Gerd Janson Because your views are pretty, how do you say? Daniel Wang View, OK. Let's go to the first page now, and see what we're actually going to talk about, and see what we think about those views. We're going to listen to some records, first of all, so we don't sit here in silence again. It's so boring to listen to somebody talk about their opinions and not hear what they're actually talking about. (music: Daniel Wang – unknown) Gerd Janson OK, here we go. Gerd Janson Back to the beginning. Daniel Wang I didn't make it; I just strung it together. Actually, I could never find the people to pay, anyhow. It was MCA. In case you're wondering, on later records, I put all the samples on the label, and it said, "Here are the originals. If you like this, then you should just go buy the original." Gerd Janson But it's still a great record. Daniel Wang And it’s a decent re-edit. It took the best parts of that record, which were actually very short; that guitar solo's like this long. It's 20 seconds. I just extended it and made it longer. Gerd Janson It's a great record to dance to and have fun to. Daniel Wang Let's do a quick overview. OK? In this package, you will find… What do we find? Overview: Personal journey we're talking about, how I got into this whole thing. That's, I hope, the only personal part. Page one. And then, finding records. I started seeing this list. Now, we're onto page one and two. See these lists here? I was living in San Francisco, it was about 1991. My friend said, "You've gotta' see this magazine.” There are these two gay, black guys from Chicago who put out a big list of all the records that were “house” records for them, up until about 1987. Which was already amazing. This is 1991. There was some Strictly Rhythm records, that was it. No one talked about house music the way they do now. People didn't even really talk about techno that much either. Like Derrick May, like he was saying yesterday, only in a few warehouse parties. Here was this list of a hundred records that I'd never heard of. Furthermore, you'd go out to the record shop, and they'd be everywhere for two or three dollars. You'll recognize some of these. Shall we go down the list a bit? Does everyone know what “Love Is the Message” is? Most? Kind of. “Love Is the Message” is the number one house... the first. 1973 is what I was talking about. Then we go down the list. I think that Trussel – the thing that was just sampled – was number 60. “I Love It,” by Trussel. We went and found this record for like three dollars, and it was just amazing. I decided I would go – and you would get these things on bootlegs – I would go to every record shop, and I wouldn't stop until I found every record on this list, and found out why they were good. A lot of time I would buy them and I would think, "This is total crap. Why would anybody play this?" I was getting into Strictly Rhythm and all this stuff at the time. The bass drum sometimes is really tiny; sometimes it's very corny and kitschy like Clark Sisters “You Brought the Sunshine” is actually kind of a swing beat. It's like [sings the beat] bum-bu, be-dum-de, be-dum-de, be-dum-de kind of beat. It's not at all disco. This is for your reference, by the way, too. Maybe you'll go and check out some of these records some day. This is “Love is the Message.” (music: MFSB – “Love Is the Message”) Daniel Wang Let’s skip quickly to page – in the Xerox copies, it’s page eight, page eight and nine. There’s a book I recommend strongly. It’s called Music, the Brain and Ecstasy, and we’re not talking about ecstasy, the drug. We’re talking about the feeling of ecstasy. There’s a whole bit about, it’s a book that basically, it’s probably the best book of the type I’ve ever found. It’s all about musical research, about every aspect of music actually – melody, harmony, preference. Autistic people who can play music perfectly but who can’t, who have an IQ of 20, for example. There’s a great story in there that I can tell you in a bit. Taste. What is musical taste and why do people carry it to such extremes? We use the word taste not just as an explanation but for justification. Some people prefer mangos, the other people prefer papaya. It begins with the notion of the role that music should play in your life. It says folk singer, the important thing is not only is it good music, but what is the music good for? Before everything else, people use music for mood enhancement. We have known for a long time that different personality types are attracted to different kinds of drugs, legal and illegal. So there’s a parallel here. We take music; it’s just like taking a drug, isn’t it? Easy listening is the kind of martini, we want to get laid back like marijuana. We want psychedelic stuff with classical or psychedelic rock. Let’s move on to the next page, page nine. I think the critic is very objective. He talks about classical versus rock. Obviously, there’s something valid in both of them. In fact, it’s too bad that more people don’t go to classical concerts now, because that’s probably a little bit what’s needed, but classical can be so stiff and so boring, who can blame you? Here we go. “Some social critics think the symphony orchestra is capitalist oppression. There’s a strict hierarchy.” We’re on page nine here in the middle. The orchestra is stratified. “Everything is uniform. The music is written by expert composers and expert musicians. The audience takes no part.” You’re not allowed. You just sit there and listen, isn’t it? “You simply consume what is offered. In short, the orchestra’s a music factory.” Next we go down. “By comparison, a rock concert is all barricade and guillotine. It is a symbol of rebellion.” He says, dah dah dah, it’s a place to hang out, talk with friends. I put a question mark here that says, "Rock is also profoundly anti-intellectual," which I think is highly problematic. I mean, you know, I won’t explain that any further. But if we move on in the paragraph, what’s interesting is it says, “Despite all these factors that we say,” some people like reggae, some people, you know, I think everybody here probably says, “We like a bit of everything,” and that’s perfectly true actually. I don’t think there’s anybody who would be here if we didn’t realize there’s something outside of the little genre that we started out, that got us into this, whether it’s R&B or hip-hop or jazz or whatever. “We make musical choices that are neither personal nor musical. We take on, we – people in general – take on music to blend in with their peers.” We often deal with this, because we’ve all DJ’d for crowds where it’s all about [makes heavy rumbling sound] or, rock! [makes sound]. “This power force overrides, apparently, considerations of individual neurology. Some social psychologists have gone so far as to suggest we imprint to a preferred musical style during adolescents the same way young animals imprint, they get attached, to their mothers. A lot of this happens during the years from about ten to 12.” I think this imprinting, it never really stops there, doesn’t it? Because at about age 17 or 18, well, 14 or 15, you start discovering sexuality. That’s one thing this thing certainly doesn’t talk about, is what role sexuality plays in music. Gerd Janson What role did it play for you? In regards to music. Daniel Wang I can't, you know… That's a good question. I would say definitely when I discovered I was gay and I was going out to gay clubs and listening to house music. It wasn't just that because most of the clubs I went to weren't so much gay clubs, there were actually, there was always more black people than gay people, actually, in general. The really strong contingent, the people who really danced were the gay people, obviously. The gay black people were, you know, doing all this. [shakes around like crazy] I'll just say it simply: They taught me to be free. They taught me to just throw all your cares away and don't be embarrassed. Don't be ashamed. That's what's the whole vogue-ing and breakdancing thing too. You know, you look ridiculous. You do look ridiculous spinning on your head on a floor. You know, but if you do it well enough and your soul is in it, whatever, it doesn't matter. That's probably the biggest lesson that soul music and black music taught the entire rest of the world for the past 100 years is be free, let it out, put your body like Stephanie Mills thinks. Put your body into the music. Don't let it only be in your head. That's one of the most important things. Like people said of Chaka Khan. She's one of the greatest singers because she sings with her whole body. If you look at actually all the great soul singers that way. They sing with their whole body. It's also very interesting because, obviously, microphone recording made a lot of things possible. Like in the ’50s ever since the time of Chet Baker. People say Chet Baker and Ella Fitzgerald wouldn't even be possible without the microphone because these people were not singing. That actually kind of comes back in the ’60s and ’70s with the divas. They were people who were whispering into the microphone sometimes and without a microphone it wouldn't be possible. I mean, why do you have opera and this kind of singing in the 18th century. [does a big loud operatic “aaah!”] There's no other way to amplify the sound in a big concert hall. Gerd Janson So, technology is a good thing. Daniel Wang Technology is many in times a wonderful thing. Also, I want to say this thing about repetitive. There's always this conflict between do I want to create tension and build and all the way Bach and Debussy and how all these classical people wrote orchestras. There is such a thing as getting into a trance. Where's our mathematics professor here? Who is that guy who I was talking with yesterday? Gerd Janson I think you're talking about Richard, but he's... Daniel Wang Richard's not a participant. Gerd Janson No. Daniel Wang He's not? OK, I'm sorry. Gerd Janson He just cares for them. Daniel Wang Oh, does anyone know Richard your caretaker? Richard's the tall guy. He actually studies mathematics and he showed me this incredible graph yesterday about certain chaos patterns. You know, chaos patterns are those goofy things you get the [shakes his hands around]. And the more you look at them they keep on changing. They do that. There are other different kinds of mathematical formulas which describe behavior in populations. Behaviors in human beings like smoking tobacco. It's interesting. You start out with any point and the graph he showed me looked like this. Hey! Paper. [writes on his paperboard] The graph was fascinating. It looked like this. You start out with this very simple mathematical formula. Where's my other pen? Oh, here it is. OK, this is just random mathematical formula. This is X, this is Y. For X we have negative one-third X plus X squared. Then for Y equals negative four. Something really simple. You start out with a dot here. Gerd Janson Not that simple. Daniel Wang OK, the graph looked like this. It bends, it bends, it bends, it bends. This is exactly how it looked. After a while, strangely no matter what numbers you put in the graph freezes. It just stays right there. It doesn't move. This describes behavior’s patterns. It obviously happens in human societies and in our brains. It seems to me to prove that there is such a thing as a locking groove. That you get into this trance and you just don't get out of it and it feels really good. I'm not going to argue with that because, you know, if it feels good, do it. I'm not denying there is this thing. At a certain point there's also this thing called boredom. I mean, after a while it's like how much more? You know, like “The Emperor and the Nightingale.” I don't need to say anymore. A picture says a thousand words. How do we at the same time get the wonderful lessons of African music, of falling into a trance, of having repetition, of having [sings a rhythm]. And at the same time us having, grabbing classical progressions and all those things that really make music beautiful? I think it's possible to have both of those things. A lot of those lessons, in a very naïve way what people put together as disco music in the '70s is probably the closest thing we'll ever get to that because when you look at everything from ABBA to the most basic like Van McCoy, "The Hustle." We're going to play that in a minute. The structures are so similar to what people like Bach were already doing in 1780. When Bach created equal temperament keyboard, which is... [plays major scale on keyboard] Not a pretty sound. Let's change the sound a bit. [fiddling with keyboard] Why's it so buzzy? When Bach started playing with this equal temperament keyboard around 1780, I think, he really laid down all the rules which would be used up until now for the next 250 years. But they hadn't really discovered rhythm yet. Not the way that African-America showed us in the 20th century. Actually, I shouldn't just say Africa-America because in Brazil, obviously, something parallel happened where you had a mixture of European and African cultures and incredible things happened there, too. What were we talking about? Gerd Janson Mathematics. Daniel Wang Mathematics. Oh, the locking groove, that's right. How do we get this. I think maybe we're going to move to Bach now. So, for me, I guess, the personal mission was how can I find out how all this became possible at all. And here we're going to get into some technical stuff. Gerd Janson But if you have any questions. Daniel Wang Any questions so far? Sorry, please, yes. Audience Member You said, was it back in ‘91, that you found that list and you went and you got all the records off of that list, correct, and you wanted to listen to them to find out why they were good? Daniel Wang I just wanted to know what they were. I mean, like, somebody says to you, let’s find an example. Like Baskin-Robbins, 51 flavors. All your life you had vanilla, and suddenly someone says, “There’s this shop where you can get strawberry, kiwi, fudge, vanilla, everything.” You just go to the shop. Audience Member Did that list make the standard for which you would deem good and bad in music? Daniel Wang It wasn’t necessarily. Because, as I was saying, I would get this list and sometimes I bought the records, and I’d be like, “I wouldn’t play this. This is horrible.” Or, “This sounds like crap.” Or, “This is way too like this record.” “This is way too fast.” “This is 134 BPM.” We all know that, because we’ve all played with a drum machine. I’m thinking, “But ‘house music’ is supposed to be 120 BPM,” or Tony Humphries’ DJ makes it only 116BMP. How can I possibly play that? Who’s going to listen to that?” I didn’t know that it was a bunch of gay men with tambourines. This stuff surprised me, and a lot of the records I still don’t have. Because I realized, “Maybe I don’t have something to learn from this record. Maybe it’s not as good as someone else thought it was.” I hope that answers. Audience Member Yeah. For sure. Daniel Wang Where were we? Gerd Janson Don’t you feel like Don Quixote sometimes fighting against windmills? Daniel Wang Yeah. There’s a little bit of that, because I wonder... No. I don’t believe that. No. I actually believe that all human beings the world over, the more you DJ, I really believe that – this sounds really corny now – I really believe that music is the most universal thing and is the closest thing to love and truth we’ll ever find, and if you don’t believe that, you shouldn’t be doing music. And furthermore, that these are things that are built into our brains, which I would like to prove or discuss seriously in a minute. And if you reach down close enough, you can touch everyone. Because this was the case in the ‘60s and ‘70s, and only now, with massive commercialization and MTV and all this media bullshit, have we somehow accepted that there are these separate categories and tribes which are, especially on MTV, white people and black people or suburban people and urban people. What’s really functioning in the back of the human brain is more or less the same. Especially when it comes to music. The ‘70s seem to show us that for a moment; and maybe the ‘50s, too, when you had jazz, when you had bossa nova. Everybody can get into a great bossa nova song, like “One Note Samba” or “Girl From Ipanema.” “Girl From Ipanema,” somebody sing it. [sings] We can all sing it. “Happy Birthday.” “Merry Christmas.” We can all sing it. Gerd Janson But what is your solution to the problem? Daniel Wang The solution – Red Bull. [laughs] I hope, I’ll just say it right now. What I hope when you go home, when you take with you today, I’m not a very good musician and I can’t really play the keyboard and the guitar properly. What I’ve got accumulated is a great knowledge of what this thing is. And if everyone goes home today and you’re no longer content to make what you’ve been making, which mostly I’m guessing is structurally, relatively simple. Or a repetitive thing based around loops. Or you’ve been content to do that so far. Or maybe you need more time in life because it’s taken me a long time – maybe 10 years or so – in life to discover, you have to go home with a conviction that this really matters and that repetition’s not enough and making a simple hit is not enough. Because making good music is something, I hate to say this, but it’s between you and God. And I don’t mean God in religious, because I’m not really religious. I’m not Islamic or Christian, a little bit Buddhist, maybe, but it’s between you and God because there are rules of physics and mathematics out there in the universe. Even if Bach didn’t discover this stuff and they hadn’t calculated these scales, do-re-mi-fa-so-la-ti-do, they’d be there in the universe anyway. If you look all around you – I’m really sounding like a religious nut, I know. If you look at the way plants grow in the Fibonacci sequence, 1-3-5-8-13 and so on, it’s all around you. In fact, we’re going to get to that, about how plants react growing to music. So why don’t we go to the universal stuff? Really quickly. One minute here. Rethinking music, dance music. How we got into this. I played you one example. We can name off hundreds of thousands. I was actually going to play you, and you probably know this, what are we going to do? Number one. First of all, we got into sounds. We’ll get into that later. George Benson, “Give Me the Night.” Anybody know that? [sings] Again, the changes in there. It does a change to 1-4-5 in the middle again. Michael Jackson, “Off the Wall.” [sings] We know about that stuff. So I started thinking about all these records and sort of put them into a category in my mind. Rethinking music. Here on this first page again. Level zero. We just invented this, because he’s always saying, “Danny, what’s running in your head right now?” I’m saying, “It’s a big zero.” Zero. Zero. Zero. What does that mean? The groove is not changing. It’s just doing the same thing over and over again. Dah-dah-dah-dah-dah, and we’ll go to this in a minute. Level one. It seemed like there was some records that seemed to have an added sonic complexity. For example, let’s make an example of this. Some records have a great groove, and there’s absolutely nothing wrong with that. Oh. Here’s a great one. Here’s a great example. Chic, “I Want Your Love,” one of the best disco groups of all time. Well, there are hundreds of them. Although it’s not really fair to say that this is a total disco groove because it actually does a very subtle thing in the bass line already. It’s basically going back and forth between two keys. (music: Chic – “I Want Your Love”) Chic is more sophisticated than we thought. OK? This is, you might say it’s... Gerd Janson Do you know, Danny? Do you know Moodymann’s, “I Can’t Kick This Feeling When It Hits?” Its samples? Daniel Wang We just sampled it, right? Well, I think we’re talking about level zero again. Sorry. Level zero. Steal groove from the past, loop it, repeat it, never changes, never varies. You’ll never get a key change out of it. You’ll never get anything more, you never even get the second lyric. Don’t play it. Don’t believe the hype. I don’t care. Moodymann’s going to hear this. He’s going to beat me up. Gerd Janson I think Moodymann doesn’t care either. Daniel Wang Right. Well, you know, I mean, this is the thing about conviction. We have all these people who clearly know what dance music can be. He knows how good Chic is, so why don’t you try to make something like this instead of stealing from other people. I mean, that becomes a moral and an ethical question, not a musical question. Gerd Janson But playing the devil’s advocate again. How many people are actually involved in doing a record like Chic’s “I Want Your Love?” It’s more than one guy. Daniel Wang Maybe about eight people. Well, also, thanks to computers, I would say, on the first one, if there weren’t computers, then programming all this stuff or an eight-track, I wouldn’t be making music either. So I’m glad for this technology. If you understand the principles, one person can do it. I’m not saying it’s going to sound exactly like that, but you can at least give it a try. And if you’ve got two or three other musicians, a studio, and a good violin player and a good horn player, you may come pretty close. I actually want to talk about this in a minute, it’s also here. With about eight tracks you could do this record. And again, how many tracks did the Beatles use in the ’60s? Four-track. Carpenters. Does anyone know Carpenters, as in ... Oh, there’s our mathematics professor! [sees Richard in the audience] Are you happy? [points to drawing board] That’s what he showed me last time in honky tonk, the locking groove. Pure pleasure. Carpenters, most ‘70s, “We just used eight to twelve tracks,” actually. When you think about how much good music came from the Carpenters, with a little training and a little ingenuity, and a good voice, you realize that all the stuff with ProTools, like 256 tracks, do you really need that? If you really need 256 tracks to do like drum & bass, you really should think about another career. Now I’m sounding really sarcastic, but ... Okay. Level two, we move onto more basic R&B, blues, pop composition, and you notice something ... Like a record like “The Break,” like what is played here might be a good example. The changes are not complex. This starts out in I think it’s actually D minor like bum-bum, bum-bum, bum-bum, bum-bum, and then does the changes to higher, higher tension, back to the original. It’s a very basic composition. But of course you can also have extended cyclical modular compositions. That means we really modulate to a lot of different keys; we come back to the same key but we’re going through some very complex changes. Let’s do an example of this. I think I’ll even play you the next Balihu record. I found an obscure classical record from some East European symphony orchestra. They had done a version of Debussy’s “Clair de Lune,” which is a composition from about 1890, I think, and done it as a disco version. What number is it? Okay, number eight. Right. This might take about a minute or two. But notice, again, we start out with a very simple tonal center, it’s going to modulate to a lot of different keys, and it has a lot of color. It’s not all major and minor. There are wonderful nines and things. There’s a violin doing a triplet going dah-dah-dah, dah-dah-dah, dah-dah-dah, dah-dah-dah over a four beat, okay? One two three, four five six, seven eight nine, ten, 11, 12. Okay? (muisc: Oto Gelb – “Clair de Lune“) I hope that wasn’t too pedagogic, too pedantic. Did you hear the entire cycle of modulations going over ... I don’t know how many bars that was. Thirty-two bars or something? Gerd Janson It sounds like something from the Saturday Night Fever soundtrack. Daniel Wang It does, yeah. Beethoven was in the Saturday Night Fever soundtrack, so why not Debussy? Again, I’m going to say, I’m not a big classical [fan]. For example, there’s loads of classical I don’t know. There’s classical we all don’t know, and there are lots of people I know who are perfectly trained in classical who don’t necessarily understand the principle of why it’s beautiful. Especially people who were forced to play classical violin, piano from an early age. I think a lot of them are not necessarily happy with what they have to do. For people like us who are so deeply in music, especially who want a beat and everything, I think we’re in a great position to appreciate this kind of stuff. It can show us the possibility of what we actually want to do in our own music. Furthermore, something like a triplet should make perfect sense, because anybody ... Who here plays conga or plays Latin percussion? A few people? More? Come on. Really? No. Really? No? All right. You’ve got a conga, you’ve got boom-chak-a boom-chak. Often you have, what does it feel like? Back-ga-ga-ga-ga-ga-ga, right? You have these triplets going, which is doing the exact same thing as the violin. When you’ve got a computer keyboard, you can do exactly the same thing on your keyboard. Should be no conflict, actually. You should be able to put all the things together. Gerd Janson What would you recommend to an 18-year-old kid these days, feeling the urge to do music? Daniel Wang Oh, yeah. Audience Member Do you think people should maybe play an instrument before having a computer? Daniel Wang Yeah, I think that would help but I think that’s not the only way. You can use the computer to learn, too. I actually use the computer, I feel, in the end, to learn what all this stuff is about. It did help. Audience Member I’m saying this because it’s like, where I grew up, a lot of music that come out wouldn’t have come out if it wasn’t for computers, and there’s a whole scene because people could afford computers and I guess a lot of us wouldn’t be doing music – Daniel Wang Me too. Audience Member Yeah. I don’t know, I’m just ... I hear what you’re saying, but then I... Daniel Wang I think you’re right. Obviously, with all technology ... It’s both ways. Even the piano ... This is getting ... We really should move on to this topic and I don’t want to keep you here all day, okay, but I hope there’s substance that can keep us interested. Even the piano was, after all, considered technology. This was rejected by most ... This scale was basically rejected because it actually doesn’t have pure tonality, and this we’re going to get into right here. After we’ll look at – Gerd Janson There’s another question. Daniel Wang Another question? Gerd Janson Torsten has a question. Daniel Wang Torsten has a question? Lying on the couch. Audience Member But what about the political ramifications? Because obviously when you talk about Chic and all those lush string arrangements and all those lovely strings, especially in the ‘70s and so on, how many string players and orchestra players have played on the not very severe conditions and so on and have properly exploited them? Nobody here would be wanting to reduplicate that kind of thing. Daniel Wang Yes. Okay. I think we have to separate the two issues. First of all, the quality of the music that’s made, I don’t want to say it’s nothing to do with ... Every musician should be paid properly for what they do, and every artist in general. But at the same time, it’s an illusion to say something like this is ... I’m not actually a Nike fan, but the beauty or ugliness of a Nike sneaker, in its design, has, in a way, nothing to do with the fact whether a child laborer in China made it or not. It does in social, in whatever realm, but if there’s such a realm as pure aesthetics as in, “This is a beautiful line for a shoe and this is not,” that line has nothing to do with who made that line or who had to manufacture it in the factory. All right, now we’re getting into some have issues, too, like, “Is there such a thing as absolute beauty.” In music, I have to say there is, and we’re going to move on to this. But there are scientific and real reasons for what we describe as beauty, this phenomenon in music, the harmonies and tonalities. Audience Member What about social conditions? Daniel Wang Right. First of all, I’m not sure if the musicians were really exploited in ‘70s. I think a lot of them were session players, and a lot of them in fact were happy to have this work. There were a large number of East European classical players in the ‘70s in New York who were just like, “Look, come in the studio. We’ll play you 50 dollars for the afternoon. Just come and play the piano,” I mean, or, “Play the violin.” It’s easy for them. “Look, just play a few legatos. Play a few styles.” [mimics violin player] Da-da-da-da-da. “Done.” “Okay, bye.” You got your fifty dollars. Where’s the exploitation? You know, they didn’t write the song, they’re not the producers. They were there to serve a role, a small cog in the machine, and they accepted willingly. I don’t think that’s exploitation, you know? Audience Member Do you think it’s the same kind of thing if you were to hire a couple of East European session players right now, because there’s plenty of them out there. Daniel Wang Personally, I’m a little more fair. When I hire session players, I pay them quite a bit, actually. If it’s my friends, especially. I say, “Okay, for five people here, everybody gets 20%,” you know? But in those days you had forty people, and furthermore, in the social context, it was considered normal. You might be surprised, but for people who can really play music, I don’t think they think so much about, “Where’s my rights?” I think people who do music nowadays, especially with hip-hop, it’s like, “Yo, I made this beat. Where’s my money?” Wrong. It’s like, anybody can fucking do that. I’m sorry. If you really... Playing. Done. If somebody pays you 50 dollars, that’s fine, because if I’m really a good musician, I know I can do something else with my skills and my knowledge than, [makes exaggerated movements on keyboard then holds out his hand] “Where’s my money?” I don’t think that’s exploitation, you know? People did it willingly. Nobody was forcing them. By the way, I know you’re asking a serious question. I don’t want to be like demonizing this. Like tambourine players, you know like “Funky Town.” My friend Ashley told me they knew the guy that did the tambourine on “Funky Town.” “Da-da-da. Won’t you take me to Funky Town?” You just go to the street and ask some guy from the gay club who had a tambourine in his bag, “Come on here, we’re going to give you some drugs,” you know? “We’re going to give you some cocaine. Just come in the studio.” “OK.” “Can you just play the tambourine over this track for the next three hours?” “Sure, no problem.” Dum-da-da-dum-da-da-dum. Oh, god. Sorry. Really made a noise there. That’s how those records were made and that’s the energy that was captured. Those people weren’t exploited. They did it willingly. They probably died from other causes later, you know... And I think to a certain extent, the only person really making the record, the producer and possibly the person playing the keyboard, especially someone like Quincy Jones. You look at George Benson and all this stuff. There has to be a central directing intelligence in any project. OK, I’m going to do a quick experiment now actually. Anybody really know what the role of an orchestra conductor in an orchestra? Like why is the guy standing there with his baton? Has anybody ever thought about this, right? Can we do a quick experiment? I saw this on Japanese TV and it really worked. It was amazing, OK? I’m the producer; you guys are all the instruments. You’re the vibraphone player. Can we halve the room in two sections, this way and this way. OK? You guys, give me a note. Sing me [plays a C note on a keyboard]... Yes, you’re going to have to sing. Sing me, “Ah!” OK. You guys sing me [plays another note], “Ah!” Nice harmony. “Ah, ah.” OK. What is the guy with the baton doing? I want, “Ah!” “Ah!” OK. Both? Right? Without a central intelligence directing things, nothing happens. Everybody else is just that, all right. Thanks I’ve been wanting to do that ever since I saw it on Japanese TV last year. It works! It was a program for schoolchildren, like... Sorry. Chairman Mao has a question now. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Yeah, I was curious to know where the music of James Brown in the late ‘60s and early ‘70s fit into... Daniel Wang OK. Firstly, I’ll be honest. James Brown, we all know... This is the political element, definitely, and it’s totally important. Who can say that it’s not important that, “Say it loud, I’m black and I’m proud,” and all that stuff. This is one of those things where, again, we get back to locking grooves. There’s nothing wrong with a great rhythm and a beat. For me, harmonically, if I think like a stiff classical musician, there’s nothing happening harmonically in James Brown. He’s just playing that same beat and the same bass line over and over again. Make it funky, it’s just, “boom boom chick.” Right? That’s the whole thing. I think you’re talking about the social and political dimension of things, and I won’t deny, it’s totally important... Musically, not much is happening? That’s not totally true, because like we’re engineers and we’re producers. You know that that beat is not so simple. If anybody could play “boom-chang-boom-boom-chang” on a drum machine, we’d all be James Brown. That’s not the case. Bernard Purdie was a fabulous drummer. If you look at the recording, there are probably great engineers in the studio. There were dynamics in that thing, so it’s not just “boom-chang-boom”... There’s the swing in the high-hats. “Fif-fif-fif.” It’s not, “Fif-fif-fif.” Right? That’s the power, that’s the life in black music. Who’s to deny it? Those things obviously came together, like what’s a... “Jungle Fever?” Is it... What’s that track? The classic “dun-a-dun-a, dun-a-dun-a” classic thing? Comes together again. You got... Huh? Sorry? OK. You’ve got I think it’s a clavinet riff or something coming together with the beat and worldwide disco hit. All the things come into play. Did I answer your question? Kind of. OK. Somebody’s saying don’t ... What are we? OK. So let’s go on. Let’s do one more. No, you know what? We’ve seen how complex modulation can be. Let’s really hit the dirt here. Getting back to basic music theory, and this is where we’re talking about what inspires me, what should inspire everyone, what is the basic beauty of music and how does this whole musical tone scale thing come about? Who here knows the circle of fifths? What is circle of fifths? Can you answer? What is the circle of fifths? Audience Member It’s just how... Daniel Wang Through all the keys, right? OK. We’ve got 12 notes here and it’s how you go around and around. A lot of people here don’t know what it is, or you’re just being modest and you’re not holding up your hand. Gerd Janson I don’t know what it is. Daniel Wang OK. It’s a very important concept. OK. How did we get tone scales at all in the first place? Let’s look quickly on the [inaudible] book, and I hope this is something you all take home with you. On page three. Building scales, alright? From, this is the book which I recommend to anybody, especially if English is your native language. It’s the most comprehensive book on this topic, and it’ll give you a lot of faith that you can actually still keep on doing stuff. There’s so much to do. From page 68, “Octave equivalence makes harmonic music possible.” Somehow there’s a thing, when you play an octave [plays music on keyboard], in all cultures across the world human beings agree, those are the same note, and sometimes they can’t even tell them apart. If you play [plays two F notes]. Did I play a low F or a high F, for example? Or did I mix them together? Right? That’s this high F. It just means any two notes across an octave, [singing] do, do, sound exactly alike. OK, let’s move on here. This is page three in the xeroxed copy, Music, The Brain, and Ecstasy by Robert Jourdain, 1997. Again, Australia comes up here, very interesting. “Octave equivalence is the only truly universal harmonic phenomenon. No ethnomusicologist has ever found a culture where human beings don’t agree.” That means all of us. “That octaves aren’t similar. The only discrepancy is certain Australian aboriginal groups never sing in octaves, but seldom range outside a single octave.” I don’t want to say primitive, modern, whatever, but there are amounts of it. What’s most interesting is actually in Greece, which became the scales of western Europe, and in China actually at about the same time, all this stuff was discovered and constantly refined in the same way. These two totally independent cultures, which had no contact with each other, figured this out. We’re going to get to the Chinese bells in a minute. There’s one other interval. Here we go. Building scales, right? “There’s one interval that appears to be universal and this is crucial to making scales, and thus to making melodies work. This frequency is exactly midway in an octave.” What’s concert A? 440 Hz. Go up an octave. What happens when you take a guitar string and you cut it in half? Go up one octave, right? 440 Hz up one octave is 880 Hz. What’s the halfway point between 440 and 880? 660. Right? We knew you knew that. It’s actually really basic to anyone, but we’re really going to put it into formal terms now and see how it all relates to what we’re doing. Sounds so pedantic. So embarrassing. “Most ethnocologists believe that this middle note is found in the music of all cultures, suggesting the brain may be inclined to categorize it.” Of course it’s a reason. There’s a harmonic vibration, 440, 660. “There’s some controversy. Some pre-technological cultures only make tones through sound. Even in the West, we no longer” – we’ll consider this in a moment. This is called a fifth. [plays keyboard] Basically, if you look at do- We’re going to build a scale. [plays music] For people who are singers, you- Sing me a fourth. You should. Who knows “La Marseillaise,” the French national anthem? Sing the first phrase. Wait, someone who hasn’t- Who’s French here? Français. Come on. I’m serious. Somebody? [plays music] That’s a fourth. [plays on keyboard] All right. What about a fifth? [plays on keyboard] Who knows the theme from Star Wars? Seriously, that’s such a standard thing. Star Wars, somebody sing Star Wars. The 5th. Yeah, there we go. [sings Star Wars theme] That’s the fifth. This is the closest thing you will get in nature to an absolute pure harmony, except for the octave. [plays on keyboard] That’s the octave. There’s your 5th. [plays on keyboard] Right? It also gives it that slightly Chinese sound. It’s sort of like, what’s that thing... You know that funny little... I’m trying to think of it. There’s a funny little game with sticks. I can’t remember the name but you keep on adding a stick. All right. You know what, we’re going to have to do this. No, you know what, I’m just going to have to turn this around. Let me show you here. OK? We’ve got this. [plays on keyboard] We find the midway point. All these notes don’t exist. Why did we get a scale that says [sings] do re mi fa so la ti do? Do, do re mi fa so la ti do. Why isn’t it do re mi fa so la ti do [sung differently], or do re mi fa so? Why isn’t it that? Why do we accept that this is the correct way to play notes? Audience member It sounds nice. Daniel Wang Almost, right. Especially out of tune. Thank you. We have nothing here. We have only these two notes. We’re in year 3000 BC. How do we find the next notes on the scale? [plays on keyboard] We know this sounds good. Star Wars is another five thousand years before it comes around. [inaudible comment] Exactly. Thank you. I’m so glad someone said that. Now, we’ve got another note and we know for sure that this note is harmonic, right? This note is harmonic and this is harmonic right? Now, we’ve got a G here, let’s go up an octave. [plays an octave] Right? Now we’ve got two notes in the octave. What can we do with these two notes? Someone else, don’t answer. What am I going to do with these two notes? Keep on going on, right? This is the circle fifths. What’s the mid point between G and G? D. Now, I’ve got three notes in my scale. What do I do with the D? What’s the fifth of D? [plays] Right? [plays Star Wars theme] Let’s move it down a bit. Now we have A. What’s the 5th of A? E. Thank you. Someone knows their stuff here. Wait, there’s someone here that’s a classical opera blah blah blah thing, right? You? What are you doing here anyway? Audience member I don’t know! Daniel Wang OK. There’s the E. [plays] Right? E. Right. Let’s just do this all the way through just to prove this actually works. [plays] Right? That’s the octaves. B to B. Whats the midpoint of B, what’s the fifth of B? One, two, three, four, five… We’re done with all the white keys, we move on to the black keys. Midpoint is G flat. OK? Now, just move down an octave so we can keep on playing upwards. Midpoint is this. [plays] Midpoint. All right? Midpoint is here. Move up, and then here. [plays] Then, midpoint goes to here. Am I right? Hold on. [plays] There’s the midpoint, now we’re talking B flat in here. B flat. I think I skipped something here. [plays] No that’s right. B flat. Move to F, is the 5th. (Notes) We’re still correct, and then F, F. Midpoint is C. We’re back, right? In theory, circle 5ths should be perfect. Am I right? We just made a whole circle. Every note harmonizes with the other. Actually, this is totally wrong. In nature, there’s a very weird discrepancy. On a keyboard it may sound right. Let’s look mathematically at what we just did. I was really afraid we would never get heavy but now you know I’m not just here bullshitting you. OK. Here we move onto, let’s see, the scales. Quick point, why am I saying this? We have to recognize, first of all, why the notes are even there in the first place, and second of all, why an equal temperament scale, which is exactly whatever computer program, Reason, blah blah blah... I shouldn’t be saying this because Propellerhead [company behind Reason] actually wants me to work for them. Don’t by any software. [laughs] What you’ll get out of any equal temperament anything, that’s all you’re going to get. You’re never going to get the fine colors. It’s like somebody is asking you to do a painting with only red, blue, yellow, and green. You don’t have purple, you don’t have green, you don’t have pink, you don’t have any of the finer shades. Let’s take a look at tuning in and for anybody who is seriously into electronic music, I have to recommend [holds up book *Tuning In by Scott Wilkinson] This is the Bible. This book, although I don’t have all the pages inside, shows you all the different possibilities. There are a hundred different ways that this [plays keyboard*]. This could be split up besides into 12 equal notes. All those colors in between are every shade of purple, and pink, and brown and gold. Every color you could possibly imagine is there, only we don’t use it because the more we get sucked into midi, and especially, big no-no, Auto-Tuners. Which you know, Christina Aguilera, “Aah,” and you know everything is perfectly tuned, everything is perfectly in pitch, Beyoncé, whatever. Sounds like shit. And there’s a reason for it. Let’s take a look. Tuning in, and here we have the sense. This is a perfect equal temperament keyboard here, interval, zero to 1200. On the right side you pure incent of purer, which means pure ratios. What is this? What is 440 and 880 in the middle? It’s a half, right? You might say 440 multiplied by three is... Let’s do this, 440 Hz equals Hz, next octave up is 880 Hz, how do I get here, multiplied by three times two. 440 Hz, go up an octave, take it in half, equals 660. OK, so lets look mathematically how we derived with the modern-day scale and how actually there’s this discrepancy which shows us this keyboard is not quite right. We go to the next page which is page 12. Are we there? The famous Pythagorean Comma. Pythagoras is also the man who invented the Pythagorean Theory. Does anyone remember geometry from school or whatever? OK, what have we done here 12 times? We’ve gone up. We should come back to zero. We’ve taken 440 and we’ve basically gone up one time three halves. This is what we did now in math. We multiplied 140 by three so we get 660, right? We did this 12 times. Am I right? OK? What we have is here, three halves, to the 12th power, right? Three half, by three half, by three half, by three half, by three half. We’ll bring it down. We went up about half an octave every time. We’re going to reset it to the original. You just have to take this for faith because I can’t draw it out. The keyboard would be too long if we did this. OK, seventh, we should come back to zero. Does this actually make zero? No. It is equal to exactly this number – looks strange, 531,441 divided by 524,288. Anyone have a calculator here because I couldn’t find one? Somebody has a computer on? Does somebody have a computer? Gerd Janson Richard can do this in his head maybe? Daniel Wang Mathematics professor? I’m serious, I would like to because if we look at the numbers we can actually look at how far off we are. Can somebody do this right now? Please, OK, so let’s multiply the number A 440 by this ratio. OK, 440 multiplied by this, what is the result? 440, a concert, ah, I’m not a perfect pitch. That wasn’t it. This multiplied by this, huh? Audience Member 446. Daniel Wang About 446, right? What happened? We thought we were playing perfect harmonies and everything was going to end up exactly back in the C, but it didn’t did it? It’s actually still, honestly, if I had the answer I would be a genius. This is one of those mysteries in nature that’s actually never been solved. It’s one of the, I think, the strange, mystical, beautiful things in music and mathematics, these irrational numbers. We don’t know why it is but a fifth is perfectly harmonious with a one, but if you keep going up fifth, it comes closer and closer to harmonizing with the original one. But it never actually makes it. It’s a spiral. This is where we’re looking here. If you read down the paragraph ... Gerd Janson Danny? Daniel Wang Yeah. Gerd Janson Where is the emotion in this equation? Daniel Wang Where is the emotion in this equation? Gerd Janson Yeah. Daniel Wang If we believe, this is difficult, do we accept on faith that harmonious music such as [plays moody keyboard chords] feels a little better than [plays dissonant keyboard chords], well not that necessarily, let’s say [plays moody keyboard chords again]. We accept on faith that this sounds prettier than [plays dissonant chords again]. Well that’s some dramatic there. That’s not really fair is it? All right if we stepped out on faith then we proceed. This is what we’re saying, the beautiful, we have to accept that vibrations working in harmony with each other is beautiful. 440, so we have what? Oh, so we have this. We have rather than this, we have this. [drawing on board] This is what the circle of fifths actually looks like or you might say it’s like this. This is 440 Hz. Can everybody see this? OK, this 880, right? This is a circle of fifth, ideally. This is equal. You might say equal temperament. It’s not ideal actually. What is the reality? It’s 446, 880 divided by two is 440. It’s 446 something. How do we reconcile this? Well, we’ve gotten a little extra thing here, right? That little part. That’s called, and by the way, there’s a name. Thank God this is actually working because I’ve only done this once in my whole life for an audience. There’s the Pythagorean Comma [points at chart]. It just means it’s an anomaly. It’s something we can’t explain. It’s an extra little like a human being born with a tail. What do you do with it? You’ve got to cut it off. Well, you know, you’ve got to use it somehow. Why don’t we take this little Pythagorean Comma, these little six Hz, and spread it evenly over this. This should be 12 notes, right? We’ve got 12 notes here. Sorry, [counts to 12]. right? What if we take that little red part, which is the Pythagorean Comma, and go, “You get a little bit, you get 1/12th, you get 1/12th, you get 1/12th, you get 1/12th, 1/12, 1/12, 1/12, 1/12.” We spread it out. That way we’ve knocked this thing off and we’ve created the circle. A perfect circle. An equal temperament scale. But the problem is... Audience Member I was just wondering how the mean tones works? Daniel Wang The mean tones, you’re saying like the... Audience Member Mean tones? Daniel Wang Exactly what we’re going to get to, actually this ... I don’t actually have it all here. Right, we knocked off equal temperament. This is where Bach says, “And why did we create the equal temperament?” Because if you actually had a scale, which was pure, look at how uneven this thing is. Very good. We’re going to get to this in a minute, look at all these numbers, in an equal temperament, if you want to modulate from key to key, if you want to go from [plays chord on keyboard] to [plays higher chords on keyboard], you need to have the same distances between all these. Otherwise the more you move up, the more you’re going to get out of tune. If you want to come back to the original note you played, all right, “One Note Samba” now, “One Note Samba, what are the lyrics? Audience Member [sings song] Daniel Wang Can you translate what you were just saying? What did you just sing in English? What do the lyrics mean? [inaudible answer] How lovely. Other rules are soon to follow but the note is still that note. [sings melody] Audience Member Who wants all of the notes go to alone and ... Daniel Wang Yeah, go to a lonely end. Audience Member It’s a forest people with relationship. If you want everybody you will still be alone. Daniel Wang In the end I think there’s also, when you come back to that one note, if you don’t know whatever them play the note, you know? The whole song is actually like a key. This is corny again. I found out what these keys were. I hope you all take these keys home and just use them, right? You come back to the one note and then that’s it. [addressing other man in audience] You seem to know, please. Hello, expert! Audience Member I don’t know how to translate. Daniel Wang Right, so we come back to the note. All right, we’ll take that for faith. If we want to come back to the note, we know at the end, starting from one note, then we have to make this equal temperament scale. Now it’s interesting, the mean tone question, we realize there actually had been other scales. You know that. For example, name off three of them. There have been names of other scales besides equal temperament. Audience Member 10-tone, even tempered. Daniel Wang Actually I’m thinking about 12-tone scales. It’s still 12 tones: do, re, mi, fa, so, la, ti, do. Audience Member Pure. Daniel Wang Pure, wonderful, another? Whole tone scale is not a 12-tone equal temperament scale but it’s a scale. I might say OK, pure tone, pure minor scale. What are some other ones. I’m blanking out. I can’t remember. Here’s how to do it. A mean tone is another one. We know now some things on this scale harmonize better than other notes with a scale like [plays keyboard], right? If this 5th is so important in making melodies, why should it get equal. This is evil, OK? This is the evil Pythagorean Comma, which makes impure harmonies. What if we distributed this thing a little bit evenly. What if instead of making equal temperament, [counts to six], dah, dah, we cut it unevenly so we have maybe, so the fifth maybe gets only a little, little bit of evil Pythagorean Comma. Let’s say the seventh note, the [plays keyboard], like that note is used much less on the scale, that gets a little more Pythagorean Comma. We still have the same six Hz here of stuff we have to get rid of or we have to do something with it, but we put it in different places in the scale. That’s where we get these scales, like mean tone, exactly what she’s talking about. Mean tone I think actually, there are different definitions of it. There are different ways to spread it. I think if you’re talking about a pure minor scale, then you take this little bit and you just ... There are three or four notes you don’t use. They get all the evil stuff. The good notes stay good. The good notes stay pure. In mean tone I think it’s distributed evenly so each one gets proportionate to how much. It’s like the first one gets eighth, the next one gets sixth, the next one gets fourth. Now that we’ve established that. Where do we go? Do you want to take a little breathing break because I realize this is getting a bit academic and heavy. It’s not so much fun, fun. Gerd Janson It is, and I think there is a second lecture this afternoon too. Daniel Wang It’s 3:00 now. I was supposed to finish at 2:00? Gerd Janson Yeah, and we have lunch now. Daniel Wang OK, I didn’t want to keep everybody. Hold on. Let’s see how much we have to go through because after we do that we may not have so much. All right, well actually, since we’ve got through discovery of scales, oh, yeah, let’s move quickly here. Then we can move onto the Theremin thing. Then we might already be almost done. OK? Harmony, what if we were talking about whole tone scales? What if we divided the scale, instead of in 12 notes, which seems to be what the human ear can most closely distinguish into different numbers, let’s say we made a scale with 14 notes, [hums scale], which ones would be the ones that would give us the closest pure harmonies in music? We have the graph here from the same book. It’s actually calculated by... Does anyone know who Wendy Carlos is? Wendy Carlos, OK. Does anyone explain? What was her most famous record? Please? Audience member Switched-On Bach. Daniel Wang Switched-On Bach, right, where she played one note at a time on a synthesizer. This was of course also the invention of the Moog synthesizer. We’re going to get to this. She also became the composer of A Clockwork Orange, The Shining, Tron. She did a lot of work. She also was a male to female transsexual by the way. She discovered at some point she wanted to be a woman. Oh, I have the records from her. How can I forget this. She actually calculated various scales. Here we have them. I’m going a long ways to explain why we should simply throw out our computers and try to play this human music as possible but I think this is an interesting way to do it. You probably won’t here this again for the rest of your life. She did several records which involved micro-tonal tunings. These are what you see on the graph. She’s experimenting with things which are Balinesean, Balinese, yeah, slendro scales, pelog scales, and also with pure mean tones. She even explains here, with her own voice, what’s wrong with our equal temperament scale and what you can hear. Let’s play this record. This is the voice of Wendy Carlos demonstrating the sounds that she made. All right, do you want to play this? You can’t quite tell whether it’s a man or a woman actually. (music: Wendy Carlos – unknown) This is what I’m saying. I know it’s very hard-pressed to see this right away, but we’re talking about colors here. We’re talking about painting. A painting with different colors other than red, blue, yellow, green. Now, move on because I don’t want to be here any more than ten minutes, fifteen minutes. Can we do this? Then we can just listen to records or talk or have questions. Sorry, I hope it’s not too long. What is the proof that this makes any difference at all? Why can’t we just listen to loud rock, crass techno, whatever, and just beat our brains to death? Secret Life of Plants. Who made the album? Thank you. It’s a bit like hippie stuff. Some of the science in here is dubious, but it’s got some very interesting things to say about what music does. Let’s look. Page 14. We’re on page 15, 16, and 17 now. It talks about this crazy woman who – maybe she’s not so crazy; I think she’s very sane – who played different kinds of music to plants and charted how they grow. How much water they used, how the roots developed. This is the ‘60s. [reading from book] So, for each of these species, Singh played several ragas. We’re in the ‘60s, we’re in Indian music. ”From this experiment, we concluded in this Indian magazine, he had proven beyond any doubt that harmonic sound can affect the growth, flowering, fruiting, and sealed yield of plants.” This woman, I think in America, tries to duplicate this. We’re on page 16 now. We don’t know who she was, but she did us a great service. In the first experiment, “Trying to pinpoint musical note conduct – she tried an F note and played it without interruption, unremittingly for eight hours in one chamber and three hours intermittently, on and off in the other chamber. In the first chamber, her plants were stone dead within two weeks. In the second chamber, the plants were much healthier.” If you play one note and pound it at people over and over – well, if you do it to your plants, your plants will probably die. That’s the point. I seriously doubt that it would have a different effect on human beings except we hardly realize it because we live for a 100 years or so, well, 80 years. Let’s move on. It gets even more interesting. They wondered if the plants would simply succumb to fatigue or boredom or simply have been driven out of their minds. I got into botany in Germany because the whole city is full of forests. When you think about plants, they’re curious, because plants shouldn’t be able to hear anything and that’s what everybody’s objection. Plants have no ears. They don’t even have a brain, so what’s happening here? Let’s move on. “But they were not indifferent to musical forms. They’re exposed to Haydn, Beethoven, and Brahms, and other 18th and 19th century European scores. They grew toward the transistor radio. Even twining the leaves lovingly around it.” I think some of this is kind of like hippie. “But the rock broadcast, the squashes grew away from the rock broadcast and even tried to climb the slippery walls of their cage.” Interesting. Let’s go down. “The rock music caused some of the plants to grow abnormally tall and put out excessively small leaves, or they were stunted. The ones listening to classical were flowering. Even during the first week, the rock stimulated plants.” I think she’s using certain kind of rock here. She must be playing Led Zeppelin because I think – loves the Rolling Stones. There’s a lot of great music. By the way, another thing that came to thought, mind. Human beings do have sexual organs. Plants do too, but rock says something to us sensually that I’m not sure – I think plants wouldn’t care, actually, about Rolling Stones talking about ... What’s the woman? “Honky Tonk Woman.” Plants are reacting to very innocent, naïve manner. “We’re using much more water than the classical music plants, but apparently enjoying it less.” They’re sucking up all the resources they can, but they’re still dying faster than they... Here’s some more of the evidence. She’s playing them Led Zeppelin, Vanilla Fudge, and Jimi Hendrix. “Plants leaned away from this cacophony. They were going the other direction. She rotated the pots in 180 degrees and the plants were leaning away again from the music.” Now here it gets interesting also. She plays percussion music to them. “The percussion, in one case, causes a lean, ten degrees away from the plants when it’s just banging throngs. But, when the same music is being played by violins, the plants lean toward the speakers.” I can’t explain all this stuff for you. I’m just presenting to you. It says something about music. Maybe it says something about what we’re making, I don’t know. Let’s go on. I don’t totally buy all of this. We have to question this too. We have to question the science. It says that the best growth was from Indian raga music and there may be some argument for this. First of all, you notice modulation – I don’t want to say modulation’s not natural, but modulation. When we’re playing with an equal temperament scale, which is jazz and classical and all this stuff, it actually goes against natural scale. It’s not as pure, the harmony. Furthermore, a lot of the rhythms are very simple. A waltz is [sings beat]. 3/4. With raga music, they seem to grow the best because raga music is rhythmically very complex. Does anyone know how to count the raga beats? It’s just like we were counting four, four in the dance room. One two three four, one two three four, that’s all of right now, Western rock, whatever. Indian classical music works on, I forget the name of it. A raga is the rhythmic section. It’s a sequence of patterns. I learned this because my friend in high school was this girl who was trained in South Indian dance. We learned how Vishnu destroys the world by opening up his eye and burning you with divine thunder. Every time we watched an Indian dance concert, she would count. It would be one two... By the way, you know what? I’ve forgotten completely about the blues demonstration. I’m so sorry. We have a blues player here who can do... Will you do that for us later perhaps? Sorry. Totally forgot. This is how you count a raga. One two three. It might be three and four, three and four, five and seven. It would be one two three, one two three four, one two three, one two three four, one two three four five, one two three four five six seven. Back to the top. One two three, one two three four, one two three, one two three four, one two three four five, one two three four five six seven. This would be the cycle of the dance and everybody follows with all their gestures. You can see how rhythmically complex this can get. Furthermore, the scales of Indian music – although people say there are 41 to 53 tones, actually, musicologists have found that it falls basically along 12 tones. In other words, it’s basically very closely related to what we have here, but there are smaller tones that are decorations. It’s like a blue note when you’re singing in jazz. It’s like “Aaaaah,” you kind of go off. A blue note. Playing this music, the plants seemed to grow the best. Let’s move on here and see what happens with something very close to what we’re doing. Jazz music. We’re talking about Indian ragas. “Reaction to Ravi Shankar, they started reaching towards the source since classical music and they bent almost 60 degrees towards the speaker, surprised from jazz. When the plants heard recordings by Duke Ellington and two discs by Louis Armstrong, 55 percent of the plants still leaned 15-20 degrees toward the speaker.” There’s hope. Music with great harmonic progression can still have a great sense of rhythm, even if it’s a simple 4/4 rhythm and, at least for the plants, it’s something positive. Gerd Janson So jazz is a teacher? Yeah? Daniel Wang Jazz is a positive thing.
Well, obviously Armstrong on Duke Ellington. All right, so it goes on and on, but I think we’re finished with that piece. And let’s see what else we should cover. Gerd Janson Any questions about plants and music? Daniel Wang It’s dubious science? I admit, I think there might be something funny about it. [inaudible comment] I think it depends on the piece, but it’s true that a lot of what Jimi Hendrix... the rhythm is so alive. A lot of it is very uneven, it’s not a regular... and maybe what the plans want is easy listening, maybe they want Burt Bacharach and muzak in the elevator, you know? And Jimi Hendrix is something human. We have a brain, and that’s something else, and that makes us appreciate things with a social level, and a context, and complexity. We know Jimi is doing it on purpose, Jimi could play muzak, you know, but he’s chosen not to do that and that’s what excites us. Gerd Janson What I don’t get, is the role of this place for your personal feelings and emotions for music, you know? Like, I never liked Jimi Hendrix, for instance. No matter what he did. It just doesn’t appeal to me – Daniel Wang I think this is where we get into the question of taste, too. Gerd Janson I don’t think that I’m dying from that. Daniel Wang I can only say anecdotes here, and I think we all have anecdotes about taste. I’m a big Carpenters fan, and I’ve never been the biggest fan of the Beatles, even though I know intellectually they’re very well written songs. “Strawberry Fields” is a great song. Gerd Janson I hate the Beatles. Daniel Wang OK, well that’s why we’re friends, Gerd! But, you know, I know intellectually... It’s just that when I hear the Beatles singing with that [makes a nasally voice] it’s just like, “Oh God, please," this is like, “just sing in key.” And when I hear Karen Carpenter sing [singing sweetly], it’s great! Gerd Janson But I hate the Carpenters also. Daniel Wang There we go, but here comes the story! My gay friend goes to a Carpenters convention in England, two thousand singing gay men, “Isn’t Karen Carpenter the greatest singer of the 20th century?” And I think, “Yeah. She sure is!” I don’t want to say it’s gay men, I think it’s something about male/female too, I think male hormones do something which, you know. Where you have to have this, you know, and there’s a way that... you know, and it’s all valid. Annie Lennox. I know you’re an Annie Lennox fan. [speaking to someone in audience] You know what happened when my friend went to an Annie Lennox concert, you’ve never been to one, right? Five thousand screaming lesbians, all with short hair, “Annie Lennox.” You can’t argue with it, that’s the way nature is. And same with emotion, too. I can’t tell you exactly why I think Karen Carpenter’s voice is beautiful, but it’s very harmonic, it has a certain tone range, it’s actually deeper than most woman’s voices, Karen Carpenter’s voice is almost like a cross between a man and woman, right? Actually, that’s how she did [singing], “We’ve only just begun...” They had her singing half an octave higher, and I think the producer, Herb Alpert, said, “All right, down an octave.” You guys have probably seen the move or something, Karen Carpenter’s story [singing], and hit, record it right away. That really was the story. I wasn’t there but... That’s one of the mysteries of the universe, whether you find something beautiful, and there’s a thousand reasons, you know. I think as we travel more, as we expand your tastes, we also learn to appreciate more and more different things. And that’s what going to clubs is about, right? It’s like, “I didn’t know this was beautiful, but I found out it was beautiful on a certain Sunday morning raving my head off E.” Question? Audience Member I’ve wanted to ask this for quite a while, actually. When you speak about, play it live or organic music, whatever you want to say, from my point of view, I think I force myself to listen to certain to things that I find cheesy or that I don’t really like at first. Would you say that is a way of exploring music, that is your way of exploring music? Daniel Wang Absolutely. I think of course you should forget about shame, like, “Oh my god, if my friends hear me listening to this.” The Carpenters, for one thing. You know, music is music, and what kind of social and political significance people attach to it, I’m sorry but that’s their problem. Especially what I’m saying is also this: if this were normal, if I’m talking to people at MTV this would be different. We here in the room are people who are going to produce music and distribute music. Now I’m getting really political. I think we have a much bigger role in leaving aside our egos and our personal preferences like, “I’m a rocker, I will never listen to the Carpenters.” Of course you just have to forget about that and say, “I hear the harmonic content of what the Carpenters are doing and I’m going to try and use that, but I’m going to do it in a different way. I’m going to use my electric guitar and jam the hell out of this thing.” You know, right? I think that’s a proper answer to that. Have you got the Theremin MPEG ready? OK, what I discovered... and we were watching this Nightingale thing, right? And I actually found the Nightingale, not kidding. After realizing the reason why we didn’t go through all this, of why the equal temperament music and all this computer music and looped music was naughty enough for me, one day in the shop where I was working, a girl came in and started playing the Theremin. Does anyone know what the theremin is? Most of you know what it is, for most of you who don’t, the theremin is the first synthesizer. It was invented in 1917, it’s a box and you play it without touching it. The scientist who invented this thing was Léon Theremin. He also invented the radar. What is a radar? You go into a field there’s a noise, right? There’s a [makes noise] when you go in here, there’s a blip on the map. He also invented the first color television. Let’s just play the thing, “Autumn Leaves Improv.” I met this girl who not only had perfect pitch, without playing keyboard she knows what the pitches are. She was 20 years old, she walked into the store and just started playing these boxes that we had in the store, not touching... mind you. Have we got it? There she is. (video: Woman playing theremin) OK, that’s a little hint of that. Gerd Janson The Nightingale. Daniel Wang The Nightingale, I met her. And then, there’s this movie. I was hoping we could show this, it’s all right if you didn’t come to B3 last night. You’re forgiven, because only one person showed up. But please, see this movie if you get a chance. It’s all about hip-hop from ‘84, there was no gangster rap, there was nothing back then. This is music and dance in its purest form. If all the people in this movie were white, this would probably be like Gone With the Wind or Casablanca, but America... there you have it. It’s such an incredible movie and full of hope and everything. This movie, we could show later. It’s about the invention of the Theremin. I got this box, and I just went crazy for two years and tried to learn to play it as she does. (video: Daniel Wang playing Theremin) Gerd Janson How do you play this? Daniel Wang It gets into DJing too, what does the DJ do with the right hand? Right, pitch. The other hand? Fader. One is doing the pitch, the other is doing the volume. What does a guitar player do with the left hand? Pitch. [mimics playing guitar with right hand] Volume. This box works exactly on the same principle: You have pitch, distance and... I really wish we had a Theremin here so I could properly demonstrate this, but you’ll have imagine. [demonstrates with hands] This is the volume, as I get closer... and I’m just going to imagine this... you have about three to four octaves here, just like on a keyboard. It’s just free, there’s no spacing. You’re just doing it by your ear and you’re finding it, it’s a lot like singing actually. That’s what’s so fun about it, because suddenly you’re not restricted to this note. And if you’re going to play false notes too, you’re going to hear it. It’s just like a violin, are there frets on a violin? No, you do it by ear. [sings] If my hand pulls away, I get volume. [singing] For example. [singing] Right? Suddenly this instrument made sense. Because this girl taught me this, and we ended up doing demonstrations for Moog everything together, and we traveled together with him. I don’t want to show off, but it was very nice. Bob Moog was the nicest person I’ve ever met. They taught me that whatever instrument you find, you just have to find the tonal note, you just find the root, and you find everything that’s harmonic to it, and it doesn’t matter if you’ve studied theory or not. Because, as it says on the sheet, all this stuff seems like it’s all academic or whatever, but theory is not a justification for the pleasure of music. The pleasure of music is there already, you’re going to enjoy it whatever it is, whether you know the theory or not. Theory is only there to explain your pleasure and help you expand it; everything that you can take home from this lecture, and from learning all the musical theory you can, it’s just going to make it better and more pleasurable. So why not do it? It’s harmless. Where’d we go now? Gerd Janson Any more questions? Daniel Wang I think that’s about it, really. OK, there’s two things down here we could talk about, but I think with you guys I feel it may not be necessary. The joy of the eight-track. Gerd Janson There is a question, actually. Daniel Wang Question? Audience Member I was just wondering if there were any VST instruments that allow you to program in scales? Daniel Wang Yes, I’m sure there are. You know, first of all there is a whole list of instruments that do it. I’m sure you can. Can you do Werckmeister tuning, just tuning, tone... Audience Member No, but can you make your own? Like in the Kurzweil, how you can program everything. Daniel Wang I don’t know, can anyone answer that question? Yes. Just, yes. Which software? Native Instruments. OK, that’s great. And you’re absolutely right. In a lot of classic models, Yamaha made a whole ton of them, like TX81Z, Kurzweil, and Roland Sound Canvas, which you get for like 300 Euros or something? You can tune every note individually. You’ve A-B-C-D-E-F-G blah, blah, blah, and you can go up and down, the numbers are a bit weird because they go by 60 and not by 100. But you can kind of approximate. And you can say, “I know my fifth is a little flat in the equal temperament, I’m going to make it a little bit sharper.” And if you really look on the scale, look, it’s not tuning everything flat, it’s quite different from that. If you look on the chart that qw gave here, let’s just imagine that we’re doing this, because it’s good practice, it’s mental practice. Okay, we’re looking at page 11 here. Look, how would I go on this keyboard and tune something to, something that’s closer to the natural harmonies? [singing] Major third, for example. [singing] That major third is a full 14 cents, 386 if not a 400. I would go right on that Roland, and I would do [plays keyboard]. I would take that “mi” and make it that much flatter. And you’d be amazed how different the music really sounds, it really works. It’s like, “This doesn’t sound anymore like a MIDI keyboard, it sounds like something else, it sounds better.” Putting it all into practice. Now that you know, now that we know all these different parts, what do we have? We’ve got Chic, we’ve got drums: one track, or two or three tracks. We’ve got bass, we’ve got a riff: Rhythm, lead guitar, strings, and horns, eight tracks. Carpenters did it on 8 tracks. Oh I know, because in the xerox package we get this: In Touch for Men was a gay magazine in America from 1978. This was when people were taking interest in disco music. Peter Brown, who had a disco hit – and I have the record here – did everything on an eight track. (music: Peter Brown – “Do You Wanna Get Funky With Me”) If people can do this on this machine, what’s the problem we have today? The problem is not with technology, it’s with the concept and the way people think, and the way people approach music and the way they approach success also. MySpace and all that. But no more criticism. I think this is a positive, shining example that can be done. Only as a joke, the next page is, “Gay report from Melbourne,” happens to be the same exact magazine four pages later. It serves no musical purpose, it’s just there to amuse you, because on the next page you see a bunch of gay people in Melbourne in 1978, wearing pretty normal clothes and doing a protest. Gerd Janson It looks like a freedom march. Daniel Wang It’s a freedom march. The time of innocence. No leather, no rainbow flags, they’re just wearing camel-colored sweaters and they’re just out [puts his hand in the air]. Back to the time of innocence again. Of course, in Sydney the first gay Australian bodybuilders’ association has just been formed, let’s call him, “Allen.” Why shouldn’t gay bodybuilders have their own club, too? And in three minutes, to sum up really quickly, following that. Gerd Janson If there are any more questions? Daniel Wang Does anyone have patience for a three minute blues demonstration? Yes, OK? Guitar player. Is he gone? Thank you, you’re there. And we can kind of put into action and see, this whole thing about one, four, five. But the most basic elements of a tonal scale being... You’re going to be playing the “E,” right? It’s actually really simple to see on the keyboard how Blues from the ‘30s, ‘40s, ‘50s on became – this became jazz, disco, this became everything, and it comes down to three chords. It comes down to basic one, five, one, four and it’s just the way you play it. Here we go. Can you give us your root note? [audience member plays guitar] Of course and it’s obvious to those who have classical training, but for anybody doing jazz or whatever, what are we doing here? We’re basically doing numbers, we’re doing one, four ... Benji wrote this out for me, thank you. One, four, one, one. Four, four, one, one. Five, four, one, five. Right? Hope you don’t mind using Roman. It’s really: One, four, one, one... four, four, one, one... five, four, one, five. That’s it. I mean, and anything in your head... It may take all the fun out of listening to dance music, for now on, you’ll listen to anybody doing a looped groove or something, and you’ll just be, “All they’re doing is ones.” And honestly, that’s the way I hear music now. And, it hasn’t taken the fun out of it, because when you hear something really good, like Debussy, you realize, “Oh my god, I can’t just do one, four, fives anymore. He’s doing all the stuff. What is he doing?” But it’s fabulous. I think you can see how easy it actually is once you look at anything just to break this down this way. You should take this into your composition, just spell out a bunch of numbers and play with them, and see where they go. [to guitarist] Thank you so much. [applause] Gerd Janson Any more questions? Daniel Wang There’s a final... I’m not even going to get into it, but a final touch. Here. Studio acoustics. How many have DJed here in clubs with shitty sound? Not so many as I’d thought, OK. Well, I’ve attached this for your information. An article about studio acoustics about how to build your own studio, and what you need to watch out for. There are less DJs here, so I don’t think it’s so relevant, so I’m not going to really talk about it. How sound reflects from walls: Big flat walls are bad. Like you go to the big control rooms upstairs you notice they’re not parallel surfaces, it’s not: square, square, square, square, they’re kind of diagonal corners, so the sound doesn’t bounce in and double in on itself. So it doesn’t conflict. Also what kind of acoustic materials are used? Do I put carpet on the walls? Do I put big blocks on the walls. Is it OK if I have glass windows in my room? These are very, very relevant. Because, if you have proper acoustic, you will hear all the frequencies which are meant to be heard: you’ll hear the harmonies, which are there and what’s not there shouldn’t be there. If you have bad acoustics, you will hear nothing correctly. And that is the problem with 90% of the clubs today. But as I said, we are going to spend one minute on that, because there is nothing else to say about that. But here’s all this information if you’re interested in it, and I hope it helps. Thank you for staying with me to the end. [applause]

---

Title: Deadbeat
Date: 2015-04-20
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/deadbeat-sine-of-the-times/

Deadbeat
Everyone who lives in Montreal is super nice, even the local politicians, but Deadbeat is just that bit nicer. If you make it out to the annual Mutek festival you’ll see what we mean. Anyway, Scott Monteith, aka Deadbeat, makes his own type of dub-laden, minimal-leaning electronics on several labels but has also been known to dress up like a farm hand and charge around a stage in the mighty two-man electronic barndance ensemble known as Crackhaus with good friend Steve Beaupre. Monteith talks minimal techno awakenings, making production as loud and goofy as possible and more in his 2006 lecture for Red Bull Music Academy.
Hosted by Torsten Schmidt It’s our pleasure to welcome a young man here. You know you see people from all these different generations and here’s finally one who’s of our age. This is Scott Monteith from... Deadbeat Montreal. Torsten Schmidt Montreal. Which is which part of Canada? Deadbeat Quebec. Torsten Schmidt Where you speak what? Deadbeat French. Torsten Schmidt And how come we can understand you? Deadbeat Because it’s early in the morning. It’s like speaking in tongues, I guess. Torsten Schmidt First of all, let’s give the man a big hand here. [applause] It’s getting warmer already. Speaking in tongues ... Which brings us to the background. How does a son of a preacher man and a reiki teacher end up listening to Skinny Puppy? Deadbeat When I was quite young I had a friend who’s older brother was into it. Obviously. This happens to quite a lot of people. It was fairly formative in deciding what was cool for us. He was the person who influenced me to buy what was probably like the first cassette that I bought, which was Public Enemy. Later he got in some Skinny Puppy, and Throbbing Gristle, and Psychic TV. As a result of that, since we thought he was cool. Torsten Schmidt So, the bigger brother decided what was cool ... Deadbeat Yeah, totally. My parents were, like a lot of people from that area, the country I guess, hippies. You know? I grew up listening to a lot of Simon and Garfunkel, Bob Dylan and that sort of thing. Getting the initial access to this whole new world was really exciting. Torsten Schmidt How did you learn to trust a hippy? Deadbeat Whatever. If you grow up with them, they’re lovable folks. Torsten Schmidt It’s kind of funny. Lovable folks and all. And folk music being so beautiful and stuff. And how you, as a teenager, tried to rebel against it. Sooner or later you somehow ended up, again, with finding out that all of the stuff that you subconsciously listened to, as a kid, wasn’t that bad in the first place. Deadbeat Yeah, totally. I think that definitely, not just with music, but basically any influence in your life. But particularly with music, you find that things tend to go full circle, you know? You’re often end up finding yourself, or arriving at back at places that you’ve been before, in a slightly different context. Torsten Schmidt So, on paper Trent Reznor and Chuck D are about that far away [spreads arms apart]. Deadbeat Right. Torsten Schmidt But when you’re 13, that doesn’t really matter to you? Deadbeat No. I mean, the end result is very, very different. But if you compare a lot of the production methods, and that sort of thing, that people Nivek Ogre like and the Skinny Puppy guys, and Al Jourgensen from Ministry and Trent Reznor, were using comparison to Keith and Hank Shocklee were doing all of the Public Enemy stuff. The methodologies were the same and a lot of the tools were the same, even if it’s produced in really, really different results. I think that’s something that caries through very much today, in a big, big way. Torsten Schmidt Now, you spent most of tonight trying to decide what would be the five tracks that shake your life. I mean, it would be a shame if we didn’t start with at least one of them Deadbeat The first one, is a track by Public Enemy. I was trying to remember last night which track release would mark me as the first one that I heard sort of sample-based production and that sort of thing. And this one’s from the album called It Takes A Nation Millions to Hold Us Back. It’s called “Louder Than a Bomb.” (music: Public Enemy – “Louder Than a Bomb”) I heard that one for the first time when I was probably 11 or 12 or something like that. It really, really marked me for just the fact that the crowd samples. A friend of mine was pretty certain, after doing some research, were actually crowd samples from the Beatles playing on Ed Sullivan being used as a percussive element. That just really, really flipped my mind when I heard it for the first time. That like, you could use whatever. Essentially, no words, non-musical sounds in a musical context. Torsten Schmidt What else is different to you, when you listen to it now, than to your feelings as a teenager? Because obviously, those are your formative of years that shape the way you think about music for the years to come. Deadbeat Absolutely. I think I read in Future Music magazine in the UK, there was an interview with Chuck D, talking about some of the production methods that were used for “Miuzi Weighs a Ton” and Nation Of Millions and the with the earliest productions the Shacklees were doing. They were doing like mixed tape paused tapes, basically, where they take whatever sample from a record, recording it to the tape, pausing the tape, going back and recording the sample again and putting these things together in this, whatever, very time consuming way. I was amazed by the sheer amount of time and dedication that producing in that method would take. It also struck me how on a very, sort of low-tech level, that relates really, really strongly to a lot of the kind of loop-based production that’s going on now. You know? Torsten Schmidt Low tech is the one thing, but then again some of us were a little bit stoked when Mr. Shocklee told us last year that a lot of sonic boom was basically just taking the SP-12 and just hitting it up through a [inaudible]. What are we going to do now? Raid Sony studios and [inaudible] and it’s not to going to happen. Any sort of strategies that you’ve already learned from that? Deadbeat I think that the examples of those sort of early production methods are great example of the fact that the tools are a really, really secondary thing. If you’re passionate about what you’re doing, it’s really about making the most of whatever you’ve got. I’ve heard amazing recordings by different noise artists and things like this, that are a guitar distortion pedal and then screaming the brains out into a microphone that are like incredibly visceral, incredibly powerful recordings. I think that it’s, like I said, making the most of what you’ve got on hand. Torsten Schmidt What cultural significance did Public Enemy have where you grew up? I mean, first it was all about New York for them guys and the tri-state area and then they move throughout the states, but you were like the first foreign market, I guess? Deadbeat Absolutely. You can definitely argue that there were people beforehand, like the Last Poets and that sort of thing that were forward in an overtly political message, but I think that Public Enemy was really the first, sort of, act that crossed over into the mainstream because the political message was so overt and for 12 and 13-year-olds like myself, at the time... [Torsten Schmidt raises a fist] Totally. Fists in the air, total bad boy music that was really loud and pissed your parents off. Torsten Schmidt But apart from the pissed your parents off bit, obviously over there in Germany it was pretty big because you had all of these American service men and it was basically the music that they listened to which in itself is kind of interesting. Because I mean, there they are serving ‘the man,’ as Chuck D would’ve put it, and at the same time listening to all these controversial kind of messages. You see like six-thousands of them on the show just like 20 minutes away from all the nuclear warheads their watching. It’s completely twisted. Deadbeat The irony in that is pretty striking. You know? Torsten Schmidt How foreign was that from the Canadian ... Like, the whole New York thing and the African American experience in the US, how foreign was that to you? Deadbeat I certainly wouldn’t want to speak for the African American experience in the US. While there’s all this talk of securing the border more and more between the states and Canada these days, in terms of cultural exchange it’s a very gray area. Obviously there’s a lot of US influence in Canadian culture and in different music markets and areas of the arts, there’s a lot of Canadian influence in US culture. You know? Torsten Schmidt I mean, you were born in Ontario, right? Deadbeat Yep. Torsten Schmidt So, that’s pretty close to Detroit... Deadbeat I mean, whatever. Toronto could essentially be the whatever state that never was. Even geographically, that area of Ontario dips into the United States. I mean, obviously, culturally speaking, because of the French culture and because of the vast cultural diversity in Montreal, we have a very, very different experience there than you do in the rest of Canada. Politically speaking, candidates tended to be more socialists and left-leaning in terms of the signs that you see on the street, and whatever advertising and just the cultural climate in general, there’s a lot of American influence. It’s very difficult to define intrinstically Canadian culture beyond maple syrup and beavers and moose and things, you know. Torsten Schmidt On the beavers and moose. There was always a strong exchange between like, Ontario and Michigan and stuff like that. Deadbeat Absolutely. In the early to mid-’90s, I think my experience was similar to a lot of peoples’ in the Midwest in Canada and in the States. I wore pants that were way too big and spent a lot of time traveling around following people like Richie Hawtin generally being a degenerate raver, you know? Torsten Schmidt While following him, is there another track that maybe... Deadbeat Well, with him in mind, there was one I was going to play before, and as we brought him up ... This is a track called “Plasticity” from the first Plastikman album that was really, my first kind of awakening to the power of less being more. Torsten Schmidt In a slightly different sense. Deadbeat In a totally different sense. (music: Plastikman - "Plasticity") Yeah, that’s a bit of a short excerpt. That track is actually about 14 minutes long and one of the fixtures in kind of the rave scene in Toronto in the mid-’90s, which is really great and something that I really have been kind of regretful to see not kind of permeate parties and the sort of club scene these days is ambient rooms. The first time that I heard this song was in an ambient room at about six o’clock in the morning in a state of ... Torsten Schmidt Shock. Deadbeat Shock, yeah, I guess that’s a good way of putting it. I’ve listened to this song so, so many times at this point, there’s CDs skipping, reel-to-reel tapes being manipulated, just, as I said, finding really extreme ways of pushing the technology and using technology in really extreme, creative ways really, really marked me as quite impressive. Torsten Schmidt It’s all about listening environments as well. They did also apply the same kind of technologies to club sort of environments, whatever that meant, in the ’80s. How do you feel these days with the art of the album gone and people just skipping through their iPods and then you have a track which lasts 14 minutes? Torsten Schmidt I think that’s a really interesting growth going on at both extremes of the issue, that on one hand with the whole sort of electro-clash movement that went on in the last few years, there seems to have been a kind of turn toward a pop-Euro aesthetic. Now the pendulum is kind of swinging backward. Within the techno scene you see people like Luciano and Ricardo Villalobos playing out with DVD decks and playing mixes that are 20 plus minutes long. You see bands like Growing from Chicago, and Tim Hecker, and a lot of these really, really heavy, drone based music starting to sort of come to the forefront again. I think that’s sort of a natural cycle that happens consistently, you know? In order for things to kind of grow and change, it’s important for the pendulum to swing back and forth between different extremes. Torsten Schmidt When the pendulum is in the middle of swinging, you still need to have the right environment. There only way we can qualify it as workspace, background music to fully [inaudible] it. Then again, when you are in relaxing mode, it’s probably not exactly the couch, armchair type of thing. Deadbeat Yeah, no, absolutely. For sure. Torsten Schmidt It’s headphone material? Deadbeat Headphone material, or whatever, I guess that’s the really, really interesting thing about tracks like this. This is essentially listening music, you’re definitely not going to be dancing to it. You’re definitely not going to be doing the dishes to it, you know? It really demands a heavy amount of concentration, and it’s intense listening music. Whether that’s something that you sit down and actually just listen to the thing from beginning to end at home, or whether there are, as there have been in many places of the world, sort of designed intense listening environments, I think that’s when things get really interesting. Torsten Schmidt To which extent do you think about the environment that the music will be played in when you do create it yourself? Deadbeat I think that the environment has sort of informed what I’m doing more and more in recent years. As I’ve started to tour more, there’s been fairly diverse environments that I’ve had to play in, from whatever regular club context, to sit down listening concerts, to a tugboat in Chile at one point. I think it’s really, really important to be able to use the environment that you’re playing in, regardless of what that is, and really sort of try to take advantage of the context. Torsten Schmidt What is your setup when you do play live? Deadbeat These days I’ve been, like a lot of people, have been using Ableton Live primarily. I spent a lot of time trying to figure out what the most effective way for me to do things was, and thankfully had the opportunity to work in a couple of different contexts and with a couple of different projects. Solo is Deadbeat, I also do a project with my friend, Stephen Beaupré, called Crackhaus, and also a project called Atlantic Waves with Mr. Monolake, Robet Henke. The fun thing, with all of those projects, is trying to figure out how to use this instrument in the most effective way. Torsten Schmidt To which extent is the crowd a matter there? Again, to the live aesthetics and like stages and setups and interaction? Deadbeat Certainly for the solo stuff, because there's been such a diverse range of environments that I’ve gotten to perform in in recent years, it’s demanded that I try and find some way of being able to change directions on a dime if need be, because you can walk into a place and assume that you know what the context is going to be and what people are going to want to hear, oftentimes, people will let you know very, very vocally if you’ve gone the wrong direction. Torsten Schmidt How important do you think is it to actually have the listeners see who is performing the music? Deadbeat I think that’s totally context sensitive, you know? There’s some situations where seeing what the performer’s doing can add a lot to it. For the last five years, since laptops have sort of figured more and more heavily into performance, there’s the argument that sitting around and watching somebody who could essentially be checking their email doesn’t provide a particularly enthralling performance experience. I think it really depends on what feels most comfortable to the person and depending on what the venue context is. Torsten Schmidt It’s also when you talk about things going full cycle, it’s kind of interesting how many new genres as they evolve always at some stage get to this point of, ‘Hey, we are becoming real musicians now,’ like there was some king knighting you. How did that notion of being a musician change for you over the years? Deadbeat I think that it’s really interesting generally to start seeing different band projects and that sort of thing who are expanding the context, or the concept, of musicians as opposed to having bass, drums, guitar, and keyboard player. We’ll have bass, drums, guitar, turntables, and laptop player. Torsten Schmidt You’re not talking about the Linkin Park kind of having some dude there so it looks cool, like? Deadbeat Yeah, sure. Yeah, totally. Whatever, even full on sort of laptop orchestras, like M.I.M.E.O., for instance, is a great example of that. What were we talking about again? Torsten Schmidt We were just talking about how for you the notion of musicianship changed, and whether it was important to be considered a musician or whether it’s just like, “Hey, I’m fine with what I am.” But what are you? Deadbeat I’m fine with being a slightly more technologically endowed DJ. I think that, certainly for my solo stuff in the last year some time, I’ve done a lot of work in trying to figure out how to make this set up of the laptop and this controller be as seamless and as mindless as possible. I know what every single control does and not having to think about, okay if I do this, what happens now? Torsten Schmidt How important is it for you to minimize yourself and what it is that you’re using, instead of trying out 800 different decades of technology? Deadbeat I’m totally up for using whatever is available. But, in terms of traveling, definitely keeping things compact and minimized is really important. Torsten Schmidt Another slightly little influence for you might be the whole dub world. Now, the thing that people learn about dub in the first place is the art of leaving things out, space in the music. Deadbeat Certainly. In many ways, going into what we’ve just been talking about using the concept of the computer as an instrument and that whole dub aesthetic, whenever it started in the late sixties was sort of a macrocosm used in the studio as an instrument. Obviously, with the initial players like King Tubby and Lee Perry. For me personally, I sort of arrived at dub backwards. In spending a lot of time in the rave scene and that sort of thing, at some point in the mid-’90s having heard Basic Channel and the Berlin techno dub sound, that was my first contact with that aesthetic. That’s the next of the five songs that change your life. This is a track called “Carrier” by Rhythm & Sound. I’ll just play a little. (music: Rhythm & Sound – “Carrier”) Although we haven’t had the chance to do quite as much in recent years or recent months in Montreal, within my circle of friends we used to run a weekend pretty much every weekend did an event that we call Demolition that was essentially bringing in whatever you had been working on whether it was one track or two tracks or whatever and sitting down with a group of your nearest and dearest and just having a really no holds barred critic session. The worst of times can definitely get ugly. Coming in and putting something on and people sitting there and being like, “Okay, your kick couldn’t kick itself out of a white paper bag, your synth melodies are cheesy, your bass is muddy, and I like your hi-hats.” Certainly not to suggest that there needs to be that really hard core criticism in place to get things done. I think that it’s incredibly important to have a community of people that you trust around you who are willing to tell it to you straight. That’s a crucial part of growing creatively. Torsten Schmidt How do you keep up physically and all that to sort of community building where criticism is allowed in a time when almost anyone known to man is too busy exchanging very charming and pleasing and affirmative MySpace messages and can’t be bothered to get out of the house anymore? Deadbeat I think we’ve been really fortunate in Montreal in that for the last seven years, there’s been a very tight community of producers and DJs and hangers-on involved with the MUTEK festival. From the very beginning of that, that’s been a very family-oriented, very organically evolving organization both in terms of the people that are involved with it and also in terms of the events themselves. Whether you’re talking about the kind of festival proper that happens every June, or the micro MUTEK events that have gone on, or the dinners and the Demolition events that people associated with that have been involved with. I think that feeling that you’re surrounded by people who care about what you’re doing and who want to see you succeed and that you want to see succeed, whether you’re talking about a group of 50 or 60 who are running a festival over here, or whether you’re talking about five people in your hometown that have that sort of positive reinforcement in place is totally crucial. Torsten Schmidt To what extent do you think the place where music is actually done on the scene is determining the actual outcome? Deadbeat That’s really tough to say these days. I think that with technological mobility that becomes less and less of a factor speaking, specifically about electronic based music in terms of real musicians or live instrumentation. Obviously we’re all sort of a product of our environment, and I think that’s a really, really, gray area these days. Torsten Schmidt Why didn’t you have the feeling or the urge to move to either New York, London or, God knows, Berlin? Deadbeat Well, at the time that I move to Montreal 11 years ago. I don’t know how to put it. Anyway, there were a lot of people who’ve kind of arrived at the city at the same time with a lot of t same motivations and with similar kinds of backgrounds that somehow manage to all connect and start putting together what eventually would manifest as the MUTEK festival and other events that were related to it. Obviously I think that different areas in the world sort of become kind of nexus points for different creative centers and motivations, and obviously, Berlin is certainly probably the nexus for anybody these days, anybody sort of related to the whole kind of minimal techno aesthetic. Torsten Schmidt What are the things you’ve learned observing various evolving scenes over the years with people who might live in one place of the world or the other, and feel kind of excluded of ‘what’s going on’ somewhere else in the world and know things to encourage people to go out and build their own? Deadbeat I’ve had people tell me that this is a sort of pessimistic view at different times, but the thing I’ve always found very encouraging, regardless of where you go in the world, people have the same motivations and are wanting the same things and they’re essentially caring about the same stuff and want to have a context within which to be themselves and get done what they need to get done, but there are scenes that have popped up in the most random places that have been really, really thriving. Again, to go back to the Midwest, to have places like Milwaukee, or Detroit, that’s a perfect example. Totally industrial town. Totally with having the industry having collapsed at some point and having so many people out of work for that to become a real nexus point for electronic music is really astounding. If people can manage to find even a handful of people within their own communities that are motivated and willing to work together and push each other, scenes and communities around music can really be built anywhere. Torsten Schmidt And then, I guess that really depends how you measure the success of these developments in the first place because it depends on what you’re after, whether you do want to have a working or living environment where you can ultimately do what you artistically do want to do. Deadbeat Absolutely. All of the people in this room are a creative group of people, otherwise we wouldn’t be working on music, and I think that sometimes you need to apply that creativity to the context in which, not just with the music, but sort of the community context in which you’re working. I encountered a great example of that when I was in Sidney this past weekend. A guy by the name of Simchan, who, I guess, has been fairly instrumental in developing things in this scene here in Australia, encountered a situation in which he had a lot of friends who were getting older, who weren’t necessarily wanting to be going out to clubs every weekend, who were having kids, who didn’t have the opportunity to do that, but were still very much passionate music listeners, and wanted to know what was going on and may not necessarily have had the time or the money to be going out to look for new music all the time. The situation they developed is they have this sort of music club dinner where everybody gets together once a week and brings new music that they’ve bought or someone goes up and suggest CDs at different times when people have been in from out of town to play shows. I did a sort of little live performance demo and whatever, and I think that that, again, is totally completely removed from sort of standard club context but provides an essential service to that community in that they’re still getting access to music and still having their sort of creative energies fed by new input. Torsten Schmidt With sales as one column of traditional incomes for musicians being slightly on the fret, to what extent do you need to tour to live an artist these days? Deadbeat That’s something that comes up in conversations with in contexts like this all the time and my experience, and I think the experience of a lot of people these days is that where as previously the idea was that people were touring in order to sell records within a traditional band context. Within the electronic music community, and certainly in my context, you’re making records to tour. That’s the sort of bread and butter, that’s what pays the rent. Torsten Schmidt Why are you still paying rent if you’re touring all the time then? Deadbeat That’s a good question. I think that certainly for me, even if it’s a completely disheveled glorified closet, it’s really, really, important for me, even if I’m only there a couple of months a year, it’s really important to have something that I can say, “Okay. This is home base. This is somewhere that you can go and unplug and feel comfortable and walk around in your pajamas and slippers for a few weeks.” Torsten Schmidt What are the Deadbeat rules for the road? Deadbeat The rules for the road, god. I don’t know. I’m still trying to figure those out. Certainly one of the most important things is that, with touring, all of this is based on relationships, and there are going to be tons and tons of context, situations in which you arrive somewhere and you have nothing that’s on your technical rider and things aren’t set up and the sound system sounds like crap and the promoter’s drunk, but there’s a good chance that you may need to be playing at that club again at some point in the future, and that it’s really important not to freak out and blow up and go home and trash the hotel room, and whatever. Just basically as with anything, it’s important if you want to get treated well, and if you want to sustain things, it’s important to foster relationships. Torsten Schmidt How do you keep up loving relationships and real loving relationships with people who might not necessarily keep it real in the first place? The nightlife is the shady life. Deadbeat Absolutely, but I think certainly in the context of this scene that I’m in it’s a fortunately fairly small, fortunately and unfortunately a very very small community, so yeah. I mean just with considering basic rules of human decency and whatever, sending people email every so often to giving people a phone call even if it’s got nothing to do with playing a gig or whatever, and just to say what’s up and sustaining those friendships is key. Torsten Schmidt Okay, but that’s friendships already. That’s one step beyond it. You still got those working relationships with, let’s say at one club somewhere in Europe that you just need to go to because you know that’s going to pay you the rent for the next three months. How do you over come your inner pick hound, like, “Okay, I really loathe this guy but I really need to play there because it’s going to save my butt for the next weeks?” Deadbeat That’s a tough one. Fortunately I haven’t really run into that situation too much. I mean, sure, the community is small, but I don’t think that’s not a situation. Obviously you don’t want to put yourself in a situation where you’re feeling abused. Even if it’s the best club in town, there’s going to be a club down the street that might be smaller, might not pay as much but it’s going to be a better experience. Torsten Schmidt Little by little. A chipmunk eats as well? Deadbeat Exactly. Torsten Schmidt Now you are on the road, you encounter different characters that you would really love to do music with and five minutes later you’re 4,000 miles apart. Now being a little technologically savvy, you somehow found a way to deal with these situations and still get on creatively. Deadbeat Yeah, there’s probably the best example of that is the first time that I met Robert Henke and Monolake was at a trade show that happens every year in Anaheim, California called NAMM... Tosten Schmidt Why were you at the trade show on the first place? Deadbeat Because at the time I was working for a company called Applied Acoustic Systems that makes various software synthesizers, the primary one being one called Task Man, which is a big modular environment that you can basically build anything that you want to and similar to Reactor and Maximus P, and Robert and I really hit it off and at the time, one night came up with this idea of how funny it would be to be able to do performances over the internet, and there’s been other people who have sort of approach that sort of thing. Obviously Future Sound Of London had a lot in the mid-’90s to the kind of remote tour with their ISDN album. For us, eventually what manifested after a lot of discussion about what was crucial for things from a performance context was a program called Atlantic Waves, and the way that we divided up the responsibility for that is Robert being the Maximus P hacking geek that he is, put together an interface that’s basically a glorified 808 drum machine, and I designed the individual sounds for it. I don’t think we’re going to be able to see this, unless we move the camera. I can describe it. It’s an 8-track, 16 step sequencer, and the way that it works is there’s a connection over internet protocol called OSC that allows you to send MIDI data and audio data, if you want, over the net, and the way that it works is there’s a small chat window that allows us to discuss what we’re performing. There’s two display areas that show the time in Berlin or Montreal or wherever the first person is and another one that says the time where where the other person is, and data that gets entered by one person shows up as one color and steps that get entered by the other person show up as a different color so that the audience can really really clearly see who’s entering what. There it is [shot of computer program]. You can sort of see it anyway. Torsten Schmidt So at this stage it looks more or less not like a glorified 808 but more like a glorified Pac-Man or something. Deadbeat Atari. Yeah, totally. As I say, this is the individual sounds. [moves cursor around on computer screen] These buttons allow you to play the sequences back and forth. It’s just a 32-step sequencer, basically. Initially when we developed this the sounds were right in the program and eventually what we found was a much better solution, a much more CPU efficient solution was actually to host this just simply as a control interface and then loading the individual sounds into Ableton Live. This is just basically working as another software MIDI sequencer in triggering the sounds out of Ableton Live. The advantage to that also meant that we could use Live‘s internal effects and could control different parameters of that from this interface as well, so it really sort of expanded the sonic palette of things. Torsten Schmidt Maybe to get a little less abstract, maybe a little demo of something? Even though we only get like the one side of it. Deadbeat Sadly I can’t demo this one. This is actually just a JPEG of this. Torsten Schmidt Obviously at this stage it may seem too many people still like a little widget, gadget, whatnot, but what are the perspectives behind it? Deadbeat The idea when we were thinking about how to approach this was really, again, coming back to his kind of less is more aesthetic of really taking a collection of very few sounds and trying to figure out how to push those to the absolute maximum. The longest performance we’ve done with this is I guess probably an hour. That less is more aesthetic really, really figured heavily into the design of this thing. Because it’s basically a drum machine, we were thinking about, well look at an 808, look at a 909, these are drum machines that have been around for years and anybody who’s had any experience with those putting on a pair of headphones and mucking around knows that you can play for hours on them. With very few parameters to control. I think that, in a larger context, not just with this, but with software design in general, it’s becoming clearer and clearer and more and more important that interface is really everything. If people can’t jump into the something and figure out what’s going in a very short period of time, they’re not going to end up using it. Torsten Schmidt Did you see that interface which is almost like the Minority Report already? Deadbeat No. Torsten Schmidt It’s like three steps further than the thing that they had at Sony years ago so you can actually touch the surface and draw things with your finger and make stuff go away and you don’t even have to look like Tom Cruise while doing it. Deadbeat Right. Torsten Schmidt It’s something there. With all these almost infinite possibilities the technology is offering us, how do you limit yourself to not get lost in the matrix and keep a decent working environment more feasible? Deadbeat In terms of in a production context, I, like a lot of people, ended up at some point with just hundreds of different VST effects and everything on the computer and one day sort of sat down and realized that I was using about four of them. But before trashing everything I went through every single thing that was there and really sort of whittled things down to whatever, the essentials, you know? I think that generally speaking that’s, going back to this whole idea of the computer as an instrument, I think that’s a really, really crucial part of working toward that and achieving a context of having your computer be an instrument. Even all the different plug-ins and things that are on it, that you really know if you make this adjustment and adjust it by that much to whatever parameter it is, then you know that that’s what it’s going to be. Torsten Schmidt How do you overcome the scare of really knowing what this thing is doing? Just really knowing what one single plug-in does can take you a week or so and then if you got those 200 on there because you got all the cracks and we’re human beings and like have fault. Deadbeat I mean, this goes back to the interface discussion. As with anything, some plug-in effects or some software paradigms are going to appeal to you the way that you work. I think that fairly quickly you can establish whether that plug-in effect or that program does appeal to the way that you work. Torsten Schmidt Fairly quickly, that’s you saying who’s been working in like a software company for a couple of years now. If somehow know, because we are all of this generation who kind of grew up with computers, yada-yada-yada, but still some interfaces still look totally alien to you. How do you overcome the technology scare there? Or how do you pressure designers to make the interfaces more user-friendly? Deadbeat Obviously, because I was working for a software company, I mean for the companies that I am using their products at this point, I’ll try it all, but writing them or calling them and being like, “Look this is just not working. This doesn’t make sense. You should really do it this way.” Software developers, small software developers are a lot like small labels. They’re really, really open to having people do essentially that and want people to do essentially that. It’s remarkable how often you’ll find those suggestions implemented very, very quickly. Torsten Schmidt Again, it’s up to open up the dialogue and... Deadbeat Absolutely. Torsten Schmidt Constructive criticism. Deadbeat It’s often not considered that, when thinking about electronic music communities or music communities in general, the software companies are an essential part of that community. I think like a lot of people, when I started making music on the computer, used a lot of cracked software. I think that’s a reality. Everybody has used crack software at some point. I think that it’s important to consider that the companies that are making that. If you want the tools to continue to be developed it’s important to support their development. I take a fairly liberal view of it. My opinion has always been that if you’re not making any money off the thing, if you’re just having fun at home or you’re just sort of getting going, I don’t have any problem with people using crack software. I think that... Torsten Schmidt As soon as you earn you should give back to those who help you earn. Deadbeat Within reason, too. If you’re using a program that costs $1,000 and it takes you three years to make $1,000 off the music that you’re making, then maybe you buy it after the three years. Maybe you don’t necessarily have to go out and buy it when you made your first ten bucks. I think it is important to consider that aspect of the community as well. Torsten Schmidt Do you think it’s a little harder to implement these sort of effects because it’s a little less facial again? I mean you have these beautiful pictures of the late Robert Moog and obviously you would never go into a shop and steal a Moog. Deadbeat Certainly. Torsten Schmidt Let alone you would be quick enough to run away with it. Deadbeat Absolutely. I think that kind of literalist view of software privacy denies the reality that we’re living in. This is something that, on the other side, software companies really need to start looking at in terms of the way that they’re dealing with security in their anti-piracy devices, that they’re not penalizing the users... There’s tons of different examples of that where the people who go out and buy are spending more time working around trying to get the security devices, the anti-piracy devices, working properly when the guy down the street who downloaded the crack is up and running immediately. Torsten Schmidt How can we as users try to work towards a change then? Deadbeat I think that again just goes back to this idea of building community and having dialogue with the software companies. There’s a very, very rare exception in talking about Emagic who’s now owned by Apple and a handful of other companies. The people who are making music software are small companies. They’re four, five, ten people that are working in the office who are easily approachable by phone and by email and are willing to discuss future developments. Torsten Schdmit Back when Emagic was still Emagic and the company who wrote Logic in the first place and all it’s earlier versions, they had a go at this like internet based interface kind of thing as well. Why do you think it disappeared so quickly? Deadbeat There’s still bandwidth issues. Digidesign has got different solutions with regards to Pro Tools that allow people to exchange files and that sort of thing over high speed lines. There’s still issues in terms of a musician playing violin in Los Angeles with a guy playing piano in Tokyo and a drummer in Berlin. There’s still issues of latency in terms of bandwidth and that sort of thing. That’s something I think we’ll definitely see in the future, but I just don’t think technologically things are there yet for full on collaboration. Torsten Schmidt Latency is one issue there, but to which extent does it really makes sense to have a band being spread out all over the globe. Deadbeat That’s the other context. That for sure goes into some very, very deep philosophical issues of whether the bass player can really vibe off the guitar player when he’s in Tokyo. I don’t know. That will be interesting to see how those technologies manifest. Torsten Schmidt No matter how far the technology goes and the possibilities, you’re still advocating the human element. Deadbeat Advocating what, sorry? Torsten Schmidt The human element. Deadbeat Absolutely. For sure. Within the context of Atlantic Waves, I can assure you that the human element was definitely there even though we were a chat window and he was pink and I was blue. Entering steps in a drum machine. That’s definitely there. Torsten Schmidt How long did you fight over who was picking which color? Deadbeat It was always from the beginning, Robert was going to be pink and I was going to be blue. Most definitely. Torsten Schmist We heard your influences, but we haven’t heard any of the stuff that you do on your own. Would you like to give us a demo of that? Deadbeat Sure. I’ll start off with some solo stuff. We’re talking about things within the idea of using the studio as an instrument and for the solo stuff that I’ve been doing these days, which definitely comes from this sort of dub aesthetic, the set up that I’ve developed with Ableton and with this controller is definitely in a very, very classic sort of mixer and FX and whatever. Trying to play things live as much as possible. Where are we here. Is this me? That’s me. (music: Deadbeat – unknown track / applause) Torsten Schmidt How do you demo music in 30 seconds that usually takes 20 minutes to build up? Deadbeat That’s a good question. It’s difficult to sort of condense something that takes a lot longer to kind of organically grow and develop pretty quickly. Torsten Schmidt How do you develop ear catching elements in your compositions when you shy away from the [inaudible]? Deadbeat I mean, stuff like the track that I just played, the sort of more ambient stuff, often starts from reprocessed field recordings and things like this. So as opposed to starting with whatever, a rhythm, rhythms can sort will sort of present themselves from pushing and shoving on different clicks and clacks off of the garbage can and the cat walking across the papers and whatever. I think that that kind of more haphazard, organic layering of sort of building things up and then stripping away the elements that don’t need to be there is just something that I’ve always really enjoyed working that way. Torsten Schmidt While working how do you manage the eye-to-ear ratio? Obviously, with an interface like the computer, live, there’s a lot more demanding to your eyes than let’s say Tubby in his shed. Deadbeat Yeah, well I think definitely for the final mix of things or for any sort of like EQing decisions, compression decisions and that sort of thing, I always close the lid and will totally remove, because it becomes far, far too easy to be like okay, “Well this is clipping. This is going over, or this is sitting perfectly at zero and I want it perfectly at zero because I want this to be as loud as possible.” A lot of times, within the computer, it might sound better if your kick drum is clipping and you can worry about that afterwards and it might sound better even though you don’t want to lose the bass in your bass, it might end up sounding better if you end up shelving a whole lot of low rumble. It might end up sounding better if you shelf out certain areas on your snare. I think that while the visual feedback, in terms of performance programs like Live and whatever you choose to use are great, that you can really get a very clear picture of what’s going on in terms of production decisions. It’s important to really use your ears because regardless of whether the frequency analyzer says that everything’s balanced really well, it doesn’t matter, if it doesn’t sound good then it doesn’t sound good. Torsten Schmidt How do you monitor your stuff then? Deadbeat With speakers? Torsten Schmidt With speakers, or what, on the road. You’re not going to sit down while traveling, while waiting for the train, the bus, the plane to arrive and you’re not going to have like these things right under your arm. Deadbeat For sure. I mean, this trip is actually a fairly interesting example of that. I’m supposed to have stuff pretty much done for a new album pretty much by the end of November. I’ve got sort of the basic ideas, but haven’t really done much of the tracking for the individual tracks. Thankfully I was in San Francisco before coming out her for a week with access to a great studio with a Neve desk and every two compressor you could possibly want. Essentially just spent the week there getting things tweaked out and sounding good and with that done, now I know that I can go and track things on headphones and not worry about how things are sounding. The initial elements are sounding good there, and that I can do the layout stuff on the headphones and then go back to the studio when that’s done, make sure there aren’t any huge errors, and feel comfortable. Torsten Schmidt Tracking on headphones can be slightly dangerous to your ears. They’re your most valuable asset. Deadbeat Absolutely. Torsten Schmidt I mean, it’s pretty easy to fuck them up real easy with headphones. Deadbeat Yeah, no, for sure. I mean, not only physically dangerous to be jacking things through the headphones like day in and day out and really running the risk of doing damage to your ears. It can also be dangerous in the context of the way a mix ends up sounding. Depending on the headphones that you’re using, you often times overcompensate. You will almost always overcompensate on one end or the other, having hi-hats that are just screaming or having bass that’s just way, way, way too loud. Torsten Schmidt How do you keep some sort of a continuity in your sound when you have constantly to change your monitoring situations? Deadbeat I think that at the end of the day, if you can make something sound good on the crappiest speakers in your house, you’re probably going to be pretty set that it’s going to sound good on the biggest systems in the world. Obviously the more systems you play on, the more you’ll learn about the music that is coming out of your computer, and it’s important to play things in as many contexts as possible. I often times call my neighbor and get him when I’ve got things done and get him to take me for a drive around in a car. I mean, there’s a lot of people with cars like the crucial listening spot because it sounds good in a car, it’s going to sound good pretty much anywhere. Torsten Schmidt What kinds of cars are we talking about, like trucks? Deadbeat He’s got a Maserati actually, so it’s a fairly comfy listening environment for sure. Torsten Schmidt How do you let your sound compete with the natural growl of a Maserati then? Dedbeat Well, I mean, that’s part of the choice of listening to music in that car. If the bass drowns out the hum of the engine then you know you’ve got things right. Torsten Schmidt Well then, so the basic ingredient is just to find a neighbor with a Maserati and you’re set. Deadbeat Exactly, that’s all you need. Torsten Schmidt I think that’s going to be an easy one then. Any questions on the issues of finding a Maserati neighbor? It is coming, it is coming all the way around. Audience Member [inaudible] Deadbeat Future Jamaican music? Audience Member [inaudible] Deadbeat Being somebody who’s passionate about everything from metal and ska, right through to dancehall now, if there’s anywhere in the world that’s managed to consistently re-define its music and consistently re-invent and create things that are new and exciting and fresh – while I can’t really predict what the future of that music is going to look like, there’s nowhere in the world that I’ve got more confidence is going to come up with something fresh and new and mind blowing. Audience Member Do you have [inaudible] do you feel the way your music has developed is because you’ve lost certain parts of your hearing or things like that? Deadbeat The terrible thing is actually somewhere that’s like an ear doctor that’s around the corner of my house that makes custom ear plugs. Torsten Schmidt It’s a pretty good neighborhood, is it? You got a Maserati, you got an ear doctor. Deadbeat Yeah, totally. [laughs] I’ve been putting it off forever, and I really hope that the music I’m making doesn’t have to do with huge ranges in spectrum that... Audience Member How people build their sound around the engineers that have been there for so long [inaudible]? Deadbeat That’s a scary thing to think about. It’s something that I guess we all sort of have to deal with and something that we all need to be sure to think about is taking care of our ears in all contexts. Torsten Schmidt We should probably play some of the more up tempo stuff as well, maybe that will stimulate more questions. First let’s – Audience Member [inaudible] Deadbeat It wasn’t that many tracks afterward. I think it was probably in the neighborhood of ten tracks. The cool thing is that the first track that I ever made actually became sort of the ambient backing stuff for a track that came out on the first album a couple years afterwards. Audience Member [inaudible] Yep, totally, yep. Sure. I mean, in context that’s Steve who is the other half of Crackhaus just finished a solo album which came out on MUTEK and I think in September was the official release date, but he also just had a baby. Things have been kind of on hold with that stuff, but it’s definitely something that we’re going to get back into in the coming months. Yes, it is definitely the yin to the Deadbeat yang. I’ll play a track. This is a track from a label that was started with Steve, myself, Mark Accuphen, and a guy by the name of Vasan Amir in Montreal called Music Risque, and it’s from a 12" that we released a year and half to two years now called “Blame Canada.” Here it is. (music: Crackhaus - “Blame Canada” / applause) Torsten Schmidt Technologically possible hiccups was the dancer, discuss. Deadebeat What’s that? Torsten Schmidt Technologically possible hiccups was the dancer. Discuss. Deadbeat Technologically possible hiccups was the dancer? Torsten Schmidt Yeah. I mean, there you are, playing around with your Lego toys like, “Haha, I can do this, hooray, and let’s build this on top of there and then you’re there and like...” Deadbeat The whole thing with when Steve and I started this Crackhaus project was really like all of the tracks get done where as opposed to I might work on a track myself for a couple of days or something or work on it for a couple of days and leave it and come back to it for a couple of weeks, we do tracks always, always in no longer than an afternoon, like get it done fast, go, go, go, next idea, next idea. When we play live together we don’t use any MIDI sync. Everything is all about the extreme, physical process of making music and making things as fun and as loud and as goofy as possible and just really approaching things from a childlike context. Torsten Schmidt So it’s a childlike electronic punk approach then? Deadbeat Totally, that’s totally what it’s like. We’ve played live with just drum machines, with just the laptops. We did a lot of sets that were just kind of DJing back and forth, both using Ableton Live. We have built different instruments. One guy that we ended up calling the Rand drum that we ended up using that I build and using a reactor, that just ... That’s just like whatever. [plays sounds on computer] We make toys to make music for Crackhaus. Torsten Schmidt So, toys in a childlike approach on one hand, but we were talking about earlier like how the electro clash aesthetic somehow resurrected the catchy phrase and the hook line and stuff. On the other hand also for the first time for our generation probably let us understand how original soul boys felt in the ’80s when hip-hop resurrected their old favorties and all of the sudden you had all of these industrial and early electronic kind of poppy things popping up all over the screen, literally. Deadbeat That’s sort of sampling with regards to nostalgia and cultural reference is a really, really powerful thing and produces some incredibly strong reactions from people. The song that I just played has got a quite famous blues sample in it and it’s been really interesting to see the diverse reactions that if you play this in Chicago or Detroit or whatever where this is this sort of history of that people totally freak out. Playing it in Japan, playing it in China was totally different. People might freak out just because it sounds goofy or funny, but there was no cultural context out there, there was no bluegrass like Muddy Waters whatever, that’s not part of the sort of cultural fabric there. Torsten Schmidt How do you overcome using stuff just for the sake of the novelty of using it? Deadbeat Because the working the working process that Steve and I employ with Crackhaus is that sort of very fast get it done and move on to the next thing, we’ve definitely used things exactly just for the novelty of using it. Torsten Schmidt Because of the effect that you are using it it must have some sort of significance? Deadbeat Totally. Obviously, the samples from different music is coming from music that are in our collections that we’re listening to, so there’s definitely some sort of significance for us, but at the end of the day there are definitely sounds that are used for novelty, there are horse sounds and things in some of our tracks you know. It’s just no holds barred. Torsten Schmidt You just were really enjoying the powerful side of the things that the technology enabled you to. What are the responsibilities that you feel that come along with it? Deadbeat The responsibilities of using powerful technology? Torsten Schmidt Yeah. Deadbeat I don’t know. I don’t know how to answer that. Particularly in thinking from this sort of Crackhaus perspective, I think that we ... Torsten Schmidt As long as the pipe is burning, hooray. Deadbeat Exactly. Totally. I mean, both in terms of content and in terms of the tools that are being used, I think we have used things quite irresponsibly, but as long as it’s a good time for us as and the end result ends up being a good time for the audience, then who cares? Torsten Schmidt And that’s coming from somebody who comes across as a pretty responsible human being. Deadbeat Yeah, I mean, whatever. Torsten Schmidt Here’s to the inner child. Deadbeat Yeah, exactly. Torsten Schmidt Embrace it. Deabeat Totally. Torsten Schmidt Well, I think this is now time to say thank you to the inner child of Scott Monteith. [applause]

---

Title: Dennis Coffey
Date: 2015-04-20
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/dennis-coffey-six-string-horoscope

Dennis Coffey
Dennis Coffey is the guitarist behind hundreds of hits from the golden days of Detroit soul and funk. He was the man Norman Whitfield recruited to bring Motown into the psychedelic era, injecting wah-wah and disorienting effects into the work of artists such as The Temptations, Edwin Starr and The Supremes. He also smashed into the charts under his own name – of particular note is the now-classic breakbeat track “Scorpio” – composed Blaxploitation soundtracks and went on to fill disco dancefloors.
In his 2008 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, Coffey talked about his early gigs in Detroit, why the Funk Brothers were “the epitome of the best band,” the importance of self-reliance, and more.
Hosted by Jeff “Chairman” Mao Our guest this afternoon has made music you’re all familiar with in one capacity or another, whether you realize it or not. He’s a session player on countless recordings and a key player on a little record label called Motown, back in the day. He also has done a number of solo recordings, which you may have heard sampled by some of your favorite hip-hop artists and he’s done numerous productions that were popular in certain clubs during the disco era. So, please, let’s give a warm welcome to Dennis Coffey. [Applause] Dennis Coffey How you doing? Nice to be here, great crowd so far. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, before we get going, we’ve heard a bit of the background about the stuff you’ve done recently, but I just want to give a very quick introduction to something you did back in the day, which goes a little something like this. (music: Dennis Coffey – “Getting It On” / applause) Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, that’s one of your solo recordings, but before you were a soloist you were doing session work. You actually started at quite a young age, is that correct? Dennis Coffey Yes, also Chuck D was here last week and he sampled that “Getting It On” record you just heard, without my knowledge, of course [laughter). So, I’m sitting in the studio, saying, “Let me hear what’s going on,” and I hear this track and say: “I don’t remember getting paid for this session.” I talked to him at the R&B Foundation gala in Philadelphia about four weeks ago, because that was the first time I had a chance to talk to him, and he said, “We didn’t get paid either. I thought you might sue the company and get us some money too.” So, that’s the story for the first time I remember myself being sampled. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Your roots obviously pre-date that. If we can go back, tell us how you got started playing guitar. You’re from Detroit, is that correct? Dennis Coffey From Detroit, and I had a couple of cousins in the upper peninsula of Michigan, and they played guitar and showed me some chords. I was fascinated with the guitar, and my mom told me I could name every song on the radio when I was three. Somehow, I had a real affinity for music and I started practicing, practiced eight hours a day when I wasn’t going to school in the summer. I ended up contracting and playing on my first session when I was 15, got some friends from high school and had to get one guy who could drive, because we weren’t old enough to drive to the session [laughs]. It was great, I heard myself on the radio when I was 15, took a couple of solos and I was hooked from then on, so I just kept practicing. I still consider myself a student of music, it’s still out there and every day I try to do something different. I still love it. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you started in the ’50s when you were a teenager, the birth of the rock & roll era. Dennis Coffey I was in the middle of it, so as things were evolving, the crowd that I hung around with in Detroit, we were playing teen clubs working two night a week. We were 16, 17-years old and we were getting paid and doing gigs already. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Describe that scene, because before you were old enough to get into bars and start doing gigs, you left to join the military, is that correct? Dennis Coffey I wasn’t old enough to go from the teen clubs to the bars, so I volunteered for the draft, spent a couple of years in the paratroopers, jumping out of airplanes, which seemed like a good idea at the time, but I’m not so sure it was. I was doing gigs at the same time at night, and I almost got court-martialed, because they were all lined up for doing maneuvers one day and I pulled up in a cab with my guitar. So, I had to join another unit, where I could play at night while still being in the service. So, I was recording with Maurice Williams down in South Carolina while I was still in the service. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, once you got out of the service, you went back to Detroit, playing in the clubs and things like that... Set the scene for us – what was the environment like? Detroit being the city where the motor industry is based, a working-class blue-collar city, where people would cut loose after working in the plants all day. Dennis Coffey Detroit still is a music town. I still play one night a month at Baker’s Keyboard Lounge, which is a jazz club that has been in existence for 74 years. We never rehearse, we never plan, I count off a couple of chords and we run with it. Which means every time we play stuff it’s different, which is a good thing for me. But when I got out of the service, I was out of the army for two weeks, I auditioned for a band gig, got the gig, and I was working six nights a week from that point on. Detroit at that time had a lot of bars, a lot of music and a lot of people supporting the music. Right now, the city is going through some economic woes but you can still hear live music all over the city. It’s always been a great place to learn how to play, get your chops together and the people like it. You can still go out in Detroit and hear live music all the time. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And still a lot of young musicians, too, coming up. Dennis Coffey Absolutely. I have some young cats in my band, they’re in their 20s and 30s, and we have fun. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Who were some of the musicians you would see around in the ‘60s, performing in bars? Dennis Coffey There was one guy who performed with me in the Funk Brothers is Bob Babbitt, the bass player, and he and I used to do all the early ‘60s stuff, the Motown stuff. We played in clubs together too. There were different musicians, Bob Seger came up through the ranks playing clubs at a young age, plus you had the whole soul thing going on there too. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Before we jump ahead too much, explain the whole soul scene in Detroit at the time. On one of your early sessions, you met someone who had a little something to do with Motown. So, just explain what that whole environment was like. Dennis Coffey Well, I was 16 and had this partner who was 16, and we were doing rockabilly, he wrote the Elvis-type song called “Crazy Little Satellite,” and we cut a demo at Fortune Records. Somehow, Jackie Wilson’s manager Nat Tarnopol heard that demo, so I found myself in the studio at 16, trying to be an artist with my partner, and Berry Gordy was the arranger – this was even before Motown. We cut the song, it didn’t come out, and after six months we got impatient and demanded our contract back. And that’s the end of it, I don’t know what happened to that record. Jeff “Chairman” Mao But in the wake of Motown starting – Berry Gordy being its founder – I guess, in addition to Motown doing its thing, there were a lot of labels and studios popping up in Detroit, trying to ride that wave of popularity. Dennis Coffey There were studios popping up on every corner, studios in the back of record shops, all over the place. We were doing sessions one after another, getting paid cash. Life was good, we were working all the time just making records. Jeff “Chairman” Mao What was your ambition at that point? Did you want to be a performer on your own, a soloist, work with a group, or were you happy just going night to night and seeing what was coming to you? Dennis Coffey I always liked to practice and write songs, and one day I woke up and thought, “People are actually paying me to play music.” Because I used to play gigs for nothing in the beginning. The lights went on and I thought, “This is great, I actually get paid for this,” and it just kept going. I never got up one day and thought I want to make a living as a musician, because I just never thought it would happen. So, as it started happening I just got busier and busier. In Detroit, a recording session is usually three hours, and we had to walk in at Motown or Golden World or wherever and put up some sheet music. You had to play that song in that hour, read the chart, come up with some ideas and make it a hit. There were three hours a session, I was doing 18 sessions a week, so figure it out — I was involved in about 50 songs every week for a long period of time. I could look on the Billboard charts and for one year solid I was on at least 10 songs in the top 100 and at least three in the top 10, for one year straight. We were very busy. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Explain what Golden World was. Dennis Coffey Golden World was a studio on Davidson started by Ed Wingate. We were never quite sure where he got the money, but I think he had a numbers-running business under the table. Whenever he had distribution problems, he would send out a couple of his guys and they always got paid. He seemed to have a lot of money. That was the Golden World era, we’d record there all the time with JJ Barnes and Edwin Starr and all the different acts there, all soul singers. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And that was before you got down with Motown that you were doing stuff with Golden World? Dennis Coffey Golden World and a lot of different labels. We did a thing with The Parliaments, with George Clinton, “I Wanna Testify,” that kind of stuff; “Open The Door To Your Heart” with Darrell Banks, Betty LaVette, all kinds of things were happening even before Golden World and Motown, there were always different sessions going on. Jeff “Chairman” Mao These were all ’60s soul records made in Detroit, with a Motown-type of feel. Later on, you found a lot of these obscure records had found a whole new audience with the Northern soul scene. Dennis Coffey The Northern Soul scene... I put out a book over in Europe called Guitars, Bars and Motown Superstars, I went over there for nine days and people coming up to me who knew more details about the records I’d done than I did. They were coming up to me with mint copies of records I’d done that I didn’t even have copies of. They were avid collectors, they knew their stuff, they knew their music. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Does everyone know what Northern Soul is? Not everybody. Northern Soul is basically records that sound like Motown records, made at the same time, but that weren’t commercial successes, so they faded into obscurity. But in the early ’70s in the north of England, soul collectors and DJs found these records and championed them at all-nighters, which are parties that went on all night, as you might guess. It kind of pre-dates all the rave culture in a funny way that came afterwards. But you played on a bunch of them and were surprised to find they were actually very popular, even though they were nobodies in terms of their success. Dennis Coffey I played on some of the records and then I went to a couple of some of the soul clubs that were playing Northern Soul and I did a weekend at a resort called Cleethorpes, where I rehearsed with a band in London – I was opening act for The Velvelettes. They’re like maniacs [in the UK]. They partied all night and dance to this music. It was great. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, at this time, for a session player in Detroit, getting down with Motown was something what everyone wanted to do? Dennis Coffey The Funk Brothers was the epitome of the best band in the world. My opinion of it was that I wouldn’t have a chance of getting on there, so I never bothered with it. But I got a call one day from James Jamerson, the bass player, he introduced me to Hank Cosby, who was Stevie Wonder’s producer. They said they were doing this producers’ workshop upstairs at Golden World, because by then Motown had purchased it, and they wanted me to be part of the rhythm section. We were going to provide somewhere for the producers to get some of their ideas and have more time, as opposed to the studio time. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Because they were so rushed in the studio? Dennis Coffey Maybe for them, not for us, we were used to it. But for someone who didn’t have a hit, maybe they’re saying, “Why don’t you have a hit?” So, we started two-and-a-half hours a night, four nights a week, and within a few weeks Norman Whitfield, the producer, came in with this song “Cloud Nine”, and by that time I was playing funk in the clubs and I had wah-wah pedals, and distortion and all the effects. So, I pulled out the wah-wah pedal and played it on “Cloud Nine” and within two weeks I was in the studio recording it. All that effects stuff on all The Temptations records, that’s me doing all that. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So that was your first session at Motown, let’s hear a bit of that. (music: The Temptations – “Cloud Nine” / applause) Dennis Coffey Thank you. That was the Funk Brothers. You don’t get any better than that. I can’t even count how many millions of records we sold over at that place. They were the cats. Over in that room we all did that at the same time – that whole rhythm section was all of us playing together. That was about as good as it gets, at least to my mind. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And that session, too, was a change of pace in a lot of ways, not only for the style of music, which was a lot funkier than what Motown was normally doing, but also the drummers. Can you explain what was going on there? Dennis Coffey That was one of the first sessions... At the workshop, we had a drummer called Spider Webb, he came up with that cymbal figure. The first drummer at Motown was Benny Benjamin, but by the time I got there it was Uriel Jones and Pistol. So, on that first session it was Spider Webb doing the cymbal part, and I’m not sure if it was Uriel or Pistol doing the backbeat and the foot. From then on, most of the sessions I was doing with The Temptations, one drummer would play the fancy hi-hat and another would do the kick drum and the snare. That’s how you got that powerhouse. Then you had Eddie ‘Bongo’ Brown on congas, that’s how you got that polyrhythm thing, and Jack Ashford doing the hi and tambourine. Then you had James Jamerson doing the funky bottom, and Earl Van Dyke laying those big fat chords and the organ player Johnny Griffith. Then there was myself and usually Eddie Willis, from Mississippi, playing those funky things while I’m doing something psychedelic. Then we had Robert White on guitar or Joe Messina doing the backbeat – he had a Fender. But those rhythm sections were all cut at the same time, so we played off each other and the track itself was better than any one of us because it was us collectively us jamming together, it was great. Jeff “Chairman” Mao But what about the wah-wah on there? Talk a bit about that, because before this The Temptations had been doing pretty straight Motown stuff, the classic Motown sound. But this was more influenced by Sly Stone and a lot more funky stuff. Dennis Coffey The producer, Norman Whitfield, was listening to the psychedelic sound, Sly & the Family Stone and other groups, including the English groups. He wanted to take it in a different direction, this was protest time and in Detroit we’d had the riots. Someone came in the studio and said someone had just firebombed the drugstore down the street, and it was in flames. We had one person watching the flames while we tried to finish the record, and we got it done, finished up, took the tapes and left. But it was very tense in those days, and Norman brought that to the music, because Motown was love songs. But he brought the protest element to it and he saw me as someone to make it happen, with the distortion pedals and the funk and the wah-wah stuff and the Echoplex, and all that texture could add to what he was trying to achieve. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Do you want to give us a little demo of that stuff, because Norman didn’t have the idea of adding the wah-wah element to the song – he just had you do your thing, right? Dennis Coffey We made up stuff as we went along. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, I’m curious to know for you as a session player, how much of it was an assembly line, a type of tunnel-vision mentality, and how much were you aware of the songs you were playing and the impact they might have? Dennis Coffey Motown would have a master rhythm chart with three different lines: the piano part, the bass part and maybe a third part in there. The rhythm section would all get the same chart, and we’d play the chart. What we would do is play the chart, but my job was to maybe like [provide] the intro on “Just My Imagination” – that was mine, I made that up. And at the end you might hear a solo or a figure, which I’d made up. We also got good at playing fill-in’s, which we played on the offbeat, so we wouldn’t interfere with the singer, because we had no idea what the singer would be singing. We got very good at doing little fill-in parts that wouldn’t overpower anyone, so that’s how we did it. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you had no idea of what track you were doing for what singer? Dennis Coffey Sometimes they had the name of the track on there, sometimes they had the artists, sometimes they didn’t. But we never heard it until they came in. I remember when we did “Still Waters Run Deep” with The Four Tops, to me it sounded backwards when we played it, but once it was a finished record it sounded great and ended up being a hit. We didn’t know that at the time. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Is there something else from this Temptations era you want to throw on? Dennis Coffey This is the intro with the Echoplex and the Fuzz, Jeff “Chairman” Mao “Ball Of Confusion,” The Temptations. (music: The Temptations – “Ball of Confusion” / applause) Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you weren’t exclusive to Motown, but others were, right? Dennis Coffey Most of the Funk Brothers were signed exclusively to Motown and they couldn’t work for anybody else. I remember doing a session with the Funk Brothers at 4 AM on a Sunday at United Sound, and it’s raining and cold and dark out, and there was a knock on the back door. We opened it up expecting it to be a musician and it was Ralph Seltzer, Berry Gordy’s hatchet man, and he runs in, points at Willis and Jamerson and said, “I see you,” and runs back out the door. They got fined over that, but they couldn’t do anything to me. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, the Funk Brothers, who were under contract to Motown, if they got caught they got fined for doing outside sessions? Dennis Coffey Yes, and on rare occasions they got fired for a short time. Jeff “Chairman” Mao But you avoided all that. Dennis Coffey I considered myself a free agent. I almost signed to Motown as an artist. I did a record called “It’s Your Thing” and gave a copy to Clarence Avant at Sussex Records, a copy to Hank Cosby to give to Berry. Within a month I had a signed contract to Sussex Records as an artist, then Hank comes up to me and says, “Berry loves that record, he wants to sign it.” Too late, that’s the deal. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, at that point you’re doing stuff with Sussex and you were working with Mike Theodore at that time? Dennis Coffey He was my partner playing in a jazz club three nights a week after doing all the sessions with the Lyman Woodard group. Mike and I ran into each other at Golden World, he was an arranger, I was an arranger. The way he learned to produce was a friend of ours owned Tera-Shirma Studio, and he gave us the keys to the studio, because Mike Theodore was engineering and I was doing the production and arranging. We’d bring in these bands from the clubs we knew and we’d record them at about 3 AM, when the studio wasn’t busy. That’s how we learned how to produce. One of the first groups we did was Rare Earth, we did an album with them on MGM, and that was the beginning. When I first met Mike, Steve Mancha had this session with Scepter and he wanted Mike to do the charts. Mike had this big budget to do horns and strings, and I’d had my first string day with The Holidays the week before, so he said, “I notice you can do violins, I can do horn and rhythm, but I’ve never done strings before, so let’s partner up on this arrangement.” I said to myself, “I’ve done them once, that makes me an expert.” So away we went. Jeff “Chairman” Mao How did you go from doing the productions for other people with Mike to doing your own solo recordings? Dennis Coffey We signed up as house producers for Sussex. I took the Lyman Woodard Trio and did an album with them for MGM, because Clarence okayed it once he’d heard the demo. That album was the first I did, but they didn’t promote the album because the label, Clarence, had went under. So, he came back with this new label, Sussex, and gave me the money to cut the Evolution album. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you put this solo album out and what happened? Dennis Coffey For the first year, nothing. I thought, “This is great. I’m trying to get something going and nothing’s happening.” I did another album with a guitar band, I used the Funk Brothers, and then I wrote out horn parts for guitarists and I brought in Ray Monette from Rare Earth, myself and Joe Podorsek and we had nine guitarists playing the melody to “Scorpio.” In the year nothing happened, I did another album called Goin’ for Myself and used horns and strings instead. Before that album could be released, Ron Moseley, the national promotions guy in New York, called me on the phone and said, “Man, I’m going to all the clubs and they’re going crazy over Scorpio. It’s tearing the roof off, so we’re going to stop this album and re-service Scorpio.” I remember I was sitting in a bar in Detroit with Mike, the record was number 13 and the next week we’re listening, they’re going up the charts, nothing – I thought it had fallen off – but it went from 13 to number one in one week. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, this was a year after you put the album out, and you thought it was dead in the water? Dennis Coffey It sat there and did nothing for a year. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, this is what revived that album. (music: Dennis Coffey – “Scorpio” /applause) Dennis Coffey Thank you. If you hear all the guys yelling in the background, that’s Jack Ashford and Bongo Eddie, they always went crazy. I left the mics on and Theodore said, “We’ve got to keep that,” so we left it in. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you wrote the guitar parts as horn parts, basically? Dennis Coffey Yeah, Mike and I were doing a lot of horn and string arranging with the rhythm section and we were getting so jaded that we’d look in the union book and find some instrument, and if someone knew how to play it, we’d bring them down and use it. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, that’s basically nine guitars doing the melody? Dennis Coffey Yes, then I did a baritone sax part through my wah-wah and my bass to add another piece to it, so it’s like a guitar orchestra. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you get that wall of sound with the melody. But you couldn’t recreate that live when you went and toured to support the album… Dennis Coffey It was too expensive. To fly all those guys around the country, no one’s going to pay you to do that, unless you’re one of the big superstars. Jeff “Chairman” Mao But that song was still pretty huge for you. Dennis Coffey Over a million sold, and people still want to hear it today. We still do it, but we don’t do it like it is on the record, we change it every time and just get wild with it. Jeff “Chairman” Mao I guess, the breakdowns in a lot of these tracks from that period are what has sustained them for a whole new audience. Obviously, they were sampled in the late ’80s and ’90s, but they were also played in the hip-hop park jams in the Bronx, by DJs who were just spinning back the breakdowns. Dennis Coffey I think that’s what broke “Scorpio,” and a lot of my records. I had the guitar parts out in the open – they could grab it, sample it and then loop it, make other records around it. The first time I went to New York, in this big hotel in Brooklyn... I’m not saying it was rough but we went in this place and I asked the manager, “Where do we park, where’s your parking lot guy?” He said, “To tell the truth, our parking guy was shot last night, so we don’t have one. Drive around to the parking lot, back your truck up against the wall, take your distributor cap off and chain down your steering wheel and you’ll be OK.” Anyway, we’re playing to 2,000 people in this big ballroom, it’s jammed, and we do “Scorpio,” and I look up during the percussion break and there are 2,000 people in a conga line coming towards the bandstand. It freaked me out, it was wild. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you’re doing the solo records, you’re on Sussex. You’re not doing the Motown stuff at this point, or are you? Dennis Coffey I was working out at Mowest. Why not? They were paying me scale-and-a-half, and I still did the Motown stuff, and I worked with Ringo Starr, Quincy Jones, Tom Jones, everyone in the S.W.A.T. TV show and, in concert, everything that LA had to offer. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Let’s back up a bit, you moved out to L.A. What was the motivation for that? Dennis Coffey Things were getting slow in Detroit and I wanted to move somewhere that had more action. The Motown thing was slowing down and there weren’t a lot of labels in Detroit like there used to be, so I moved to LA to see what opportunities were out there. And I wanted to do a film – I thought that was a big deal. When I got there, I told Clarence Avant to see if he could find me a deal to do a film, and I was sitting out there for two months, and didn’t hear anything, so I thought, “OK, we’re falling off a cliff here, we’re done.” So, I get a call from Motown, and I went into the studio at Mowest at 10 AM, and they kept bouncing me upstairs, downstairs. By the time I’d finished recording everything they needed doing it was 4 AM the following day, that was my first session at Mowest. Jeff “Chairman” Mao That was Motown’s West Coast studios, but Motown actually left Detroit altogether around that time. Dennis Coffey They had their other studio ready, and then one day the Funk Brothers turned up for a session... Here you come, you’ve spent the major part of your career doing sessions for Motown, you show up to do a session, and there’s a sign on the door saying: “There will never be any sessions here again. We’re closed.” That’s the word to the Funk Brothers got on their final day. They turned up expecting to do a session, and to get paid, and there’s a sign on the door saying Motown is closed in Detroit. Jeff “Chairman” Mao That’s pretty crazy. What was the reaction of the guys who you stayed in touch with? Dennis Coffey Has anyone seen the Standing in the Shadows of Motown documentary? That pretty much sums it up. The guy who made it, Allan Slutsky, wanted me to do more in the film. He said, “Let me see your guitar, I want to show you how I want you to play it.” I said, “OK.” So, when it came to the show I said, “Alan, why don’t you play it yourself?” and I didn’t go. But the guys felt bad about what happened – he just rubbed me the wrong way – but all the guys felt let down and about four weeks later I was at the R&B Foundation in Philly and Chaka Khan and Aretha [Franklin] and Jerry Butler, everyone was there, Bonnie Raitt, and they gave myself, Uriel Jones, Eddie Willis and Bob Babbitt – pioneer Funk Brother – awards, it was really nice. Dionne Warwick was singing there, everyone in R&B was performing. So, it was a great wrap-up to the whole career of working with the Funk Brothers. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you went to LA to try and get some TV and soundtrack work. As far as “Scorpio,” and that whole era, you did the whole guitar orchestra thing, but when you had a chance to do film work, you experimented with that as well… Dennis Coffey I always try to do different things, it’s the heart of creativity. I always try to play new songs, try new licks, always something new. If you don’t, it can get boring, you’ve got to challenge yourself all the time. So, I went to see Fred Weintraub, who was doing this movie Black Belt Jones, and he had everything except a main theme and a love theme. So, I sat down and decided I’ve got to do something different. I watched it and came up with the main theme and the love theme. I decided again to do something different, what could I do different on this film? I knew the singers in LA could sight-read, they could read pretty much anything, so I wrote out vocal parts for the melody, ran them through my wah-wah pedal and the amp. Then, in the middle, I did this breakdown, wrote out this counterpoint piece of four voice parts working against each other in harmony, almost like a Bach kind of invention, and I put that in the middle, which is what you hear in “Theme from Black Belt Jones.” Jeff “Chairman” Mao OK, this is “Theme from Black Belt Jones,” a martial arts film. (music: Dennis Coffey – “Theme from Black Belt Jones” / applause) Dennis Coffey Thank you. The horn and string parts were written by my partner Mike Theodore. You can see we had all the LA cats. It’s fun, you can hear it in the intensity of the players, that’s what it’s all about for me. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Besides the Black Belt Jones tracks, you never really tried that again with the voices and the wah-wah? Dennis Coffey I went to the screening, and the sound effects were louder than my music, so I got ticked off and I didn’t do any more movies [laughs]. I get stubborn sometimes. Jeff “Chairman” Mao How did you like LA? Dennis Coffey I was out there for three years, I did the film, did all the TV shows, and played with everyone I wanted to play with. After a while, I decided it was too hectic and I wanted some peace and quiet, so I went back to Detroit. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And what happened back in Detroit, what was the game plan at that point? Dennis Coffey Sussex was having financial difficulties, so I switched companies and got a deal with Westbound, with Armen Boladian for myself and my partner Mike Theodore, so we moved our operations there. In 1975, we recorded an album for Westbound, part of it was done in LA, part in Detroit. Then we moved operations to Detroit to support Westbound. Jeff “Chairman” Mao At this point you’re working with Westbound out of Detroit. You said you were studying what was happening with disco. What did you do to study what was going on and how it was put together? Dennis Coffey We were getting pressure from Armen, who was getting pressure from Atlantic – you know, we’ve got to get some hits and disco was out there. Mike and I had been to New York to go to some of the Billboard conventions, so I knew what was going on with the disco market. I went and bought a bunch of disco records and pulled them apart, piece by piece, figured out what made them tick and used that as a foundation. That’s how we created this record “Devil’s Gun,” and to make it happen we got the disco mixmaster Tom Moulton, a fantastic guy, and had him do the mixdown on it. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Who was Tom Moulton? Dennis Coffey Back then he was a DJ, very successful in the clubs of New York. He did the mixdowns at Sigma Sound in Philadelphia, and we knew that to make this thing happen we needed him to do the mixes for us. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Now, we don’t have “Devil’s Gun,” which was the single. But we can play another one from CJ & Company. This is by CJ & Company, so this is you and Mike Theodore writing and producing? Dennis Coffey Not writing, arranging. (music: CJ & Company – “We Got Our Own Thing” / applause) Jeff “Chairman” Mao You don’t hear that much about your work in this area. Everyone talks about “Scorpio” and all that stuff. But your records from then, a lot of them were embraced by people like David Mancuso at The Loft and other big underground DJs in New York. Nobody talks about this era, though. Dennis Coffey At first, it was like the stepchild of the funk era, they didn’t want to understand it in Detroit. But we were using the funk players to do it, and the Bee Gees were using the funk players to do it, it was just a different form of music. My partner Mike Theodore got very good at doing horns and strings, and the records still hold up. When I work at Baker’s Keyboard Lounge, the first few times I did upright bass, traditional jazz and the people gave me blank stares, so I had to bring back the funksters and we get crazy and funky. That’s what people want from me, so that’s what I do. Jeff “Chairman” Mao This wasn’t a good experience for you at Westbound? Dennis Coffey I think their deal just ran out. We came in to talk to Armen, and Atlantic had cut them loose, so within two weeks we’re out of work, boom! Jeff “Chairman” Mao And then you moved to New York at this point? Dennis Coffey Yes, we had a couple of independent deals, but the record business was so bad they would give you $50,000, Columbia did, for a project and they didn’t even put it out. The record companies started as a small business, then it got huge, but at that point there was a lot of competition for the entertainment dollar, and this was the first of the cracks starting to appear in the record business – and this was back in the late ’70s, early ’80s. It was suddenly not a young business any more, it was starting to age. We had three deals already paid for with different acts, and the companies refused to put the stuff out. Once we got to New York, the labels changed up. They said, “OK, Mr Producer, you spend your money and you go cut a master, and if we like it, we will put it out. If we don’t, you eat the cost.” So, that’s when I stopped being Mr Producer. “You’ve gotta be kidding me, man, we’re not playing that game.” Jeff “Chairman” Mao What about session work? Was there any session work in New York at that time? Dennis Coffey There were a few things, but New York was jammed up. I was there for a few years but it just wasn’t working out, and I realized it was time to rethink being in the music business, and came back to Detroit and ended up going to work for one of the car companies. Jeff “Chairman” Mao In your book, you make a very profound point about how the thrill of life is your livelihood and once that’s taken away from you, it can leave you very depressed. Dennis Coffey If there’s one thing that I can state to everybody, it’s self-reliance and flexibility. No one’s going to cover you. No one’s going to cover you or give you money the rest of your life. You have to take care of your own skill and talent and have to be flexible. I went back to school, got two masters degrees and I was sent all over the country by one of the car companies. And all my buddies in the music business were literally dying because things fell apart, some of them couldn’t cope. I mean dying, dead. It was really tragic. But you have to keep your skills going and be aware, because no one can be creative when they’re starving. Jeff “Chairman” Mao But one thing you had to do when you got back to Detroit, you had to find a way to pay the bills because things had dried up. Dennis Coffey Yeah, I went to work on an assembly line. They’re playing my records on the radio while I’m building cars. You’ve got to be flexible, if you take it too seriously, it’ll kill you. So, you just say, “OK, I’ve got to find another way to make money now,” and you just do it. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you were on the assembly line. What was the environment like and your mentality? Dennis Coffey Well, it kind of sucked. I was putting in transmissions, putting in torque converters, building transmissions, it was 120 degrees in the summer. Then they said they needed someone to be an instructor, and I had taught guitar. So, I applied for that job, and I ended up learning a thing called instructional design. So, while I was working on the line, I went back and got a masters degree in instructional technology and for the last ten years, I was a consultant for the Ford company, they were sending me all over the place. That was my last job in the regular business, now I’m just back doing music again. Jeff “Chairman” Mao During that time, was music completely absent from your life? Did you play at all, any regular gigs? Dennis Coffey The only time in my entire life that I didn’t have my hands on a guitar on a regular basis was in boot camp in the army, because they wouldn’t let me bring my guitar there. But after that, and after jump school, I had my guitar the entire time in the army, then every day of my life. I play two hours a day, I’m on it, it’s just what I like to do. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, you were working at Ford, then you got back into the music thing and realized you could make a living doing gigs around town. Dennis Coffey It worked out good, the first time I did a gig at Baker’s Keyboard, I talked to the owner, and I figured out after three weeks trying to get a rehearsal, it wasn’t going to happen. So, I showed up the day of the job with musicians I hadn’t met before. I gave the piano player and the bass player a chord sheet and said, “OK, we’re doing this song.” I counted it off and away we went. I’ve never rehearsed with anybody since for the Baker’s gig. I’ve been through many musicians, but one thing about Detroit, if you get good players, it will work out, and it always has. Jeff “Chairman” Mao What is it about Detroit as a city that has produced so many great musicians, producers, DJs? Dennis Coffey It’s part of the culture. I can only figure out that you can go all over the place and still hear live music. Levi Stubbs of the Four Tops just passed away, and the reason I think that shows you something about the culture is because a few years ago he had a stroke and I played a show for him at the Opera House in Detroit; all the major stars showed up, and halfway through the show, they brought him out in a wheelchair. He was singing two verses of a song with Aretha Franklin, and the Four Tops were singing behind him and Dennis Edwards and The Temptations were singing on the side, and it just brought the house down. But he was our friend and we were all going to do this, and that’s also part of the culture of the city. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Speaking of Rodriguez and that whole era, and even the Temptations material that Norman Whitfield did, it was very topical, incorporating that protest sensibility in the late ’60s. There were famous riots in Detroit in the late ’60s, what was it like at the time? Dennis Coffey The thing that started it was a place, a “blind pig,” which was [an licensed place] but was serving alcohol. The police went in and busted it and got heavy handed with the people and it was a hot summer night. And the economy wasn’t doing too good, there was a lot of tension, and it just erupted into a riot. It got so bad that they brought in the National Guard, and they actually brought in my old unit, the 101st Airborne division. Some of them had come back from Vietnam. But you can see how serious it was – when you had the 101st Airborne and when they show it on TV, they had a sniper in a building. He’s shooting at the 101st Airborne division guys and they’re in a self-propelled gun. The captain of the unit has a bullhorn and he tells them to stop firing, and you can hear the pings off the self-propelled gun. And the guy says something and you can see the cannon go and it blew off the whole corner of the building with the guy still in it. That’s how bad that was. Jeff “Chairman” Mao The Motown musicians were black and white players. Was there any sort of carry over, or any camaraderie? Dennis Coffey We were all friends, and I was working in the black clubs anyway. Eddie Willis, the guitar player, told me he came home one night after a session and he got stopped outside of his house by a tank. The tank had a turret pointing at him, and it made him get out of his car – and Eddie uses a cane too. They got the tank on him and asked him what he was doing there. He said, “Man, this is my house, I live here.” It was kind of a weird story he told us later on. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Any questions? Audience Member First of all, much respect. So, what year was it that you put the wah-wah on that song? Dennis Coffey That was probably ‘68. Audience Member So, [Jimi] Hendrix was using it? Dennis Coffey Hendrix, Eric Clapton and a few other folks. The only thing I did was, I was the first to put it in an R&B song. Audience Member There’s been a debate about who was the first person to use the wah-wah. Do you know who might have used it first? Dennis Coffey Boy, I don’t. I can only speak for when I used it. In R&B, I was using special effects, like “In the Rain” by The Dramatics, the Echoplex intro, that was me. And “Whatcha See Is Whatcha Get,” I used something different on that. Also “Don’t Knock My Love,” with Muscle Shoals and Wilson Pickett. So, I was getting around using sound effects on different things. “Smiling Faces Sometimes,” I put a solo in the middle of that, but that was a Condor unit, that was a different effect. Audience Member So, you had no idea that you were responsible for all the psychedelic Motown stuff? That’s really cool. Dennis Coffey We had fun. Norman Whitfield, who unfortunately passed away three weeks ago, he was the guy who wanted to do that. The BBC were doing a documentary and they came into Baker’s and Spyder Turner, who was a friend of Norman’s, was telling me about his illness and how they were staying together for a while. And Norman was telling him, “Man, I’ve gotta have some fried chicken.” “It’s the fried chicken that’s got you sick, you ain’t getting any more.” That was the story about Norman. Audience Member My last question – do you remember when you started working at Motown how many tracks they had in the studio? Was it just four-track? Dennis Coffey I would think probably eight by then. When me and Mike Theodore started recording, we used four, and we were recording orchestras. What we’d do is record the rhythm tracks, then bounce them to one track; then the horns and strings, and bounce that to one track; then the lead; then the background singers. With a four-track you’d have an orchestra on one, a full rhythm section on one, a lead singer on one, and background singers on one. I’m telling you, you were limited in the mixing, trying to do that. Trying to get a stereo image with just four tracks, and you couldn’t re-equalize everything much. Certainly, you couldn’t redo the individual instruments, you couldn’t re-EQ them because they were all on one track. Audience Member We have limitless tracks now [laughs). Dennis Coffey It was a big deal when we went from four to eight, I thought “This is heaven.” Then we went to 16 and I thought, “Man, we’re really living now.” Then 24. Then in LA, they were linking two 24-tracks together. Then I did a session where they brought in some guys from Motown, and I would say they had a 24-track on nothing but background voices. It’s crazy – this is taxing my brain, we need to do simple things. Audience Member How old were you when you did your first Motown session? Dennis Coffey Probably in my late 20s. I’d already played with The Volumes and on hit records with Del Shannon, so it just segued from Golden World into the Motown thing. Audience Member Thanks for being here. Dennis Coffey You folks are the next generation, you’ve got the future right here. Down the road you may be sitting up talking to some people like I’m doing now. You’ll be having this chair, you’re the people who are going to be doing things down the road. The future belongs to you, folks. Thanks for the spontaneous standing O. Thank you, Mr Dennis Coffey. Dennis Coffey Thank you, let’s give Jeff a big hand for what he’s done. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Like I said, Dennis will be around for four more days.
(music: Dennis Coffey – guitar demo / applause)
That’s the wah-wah pedal, now I’ll show a bit of distortion.
(music: Dennis Coffey – guitar demo)
And you can add effects to it like in “Ball of Confusion.”
(music: Dennis Coffey – guitar demo)
I combined all this with other devices, so Norman would say, “Let me see your bag of toys, let’s see what you’ve got.” So, I’d pull out all these pedals and he’d say, “I like that one.” And we’re off and running.
[Applause]
[Standing ovation]
Speaker: Jeff “Chairman” Mao

---

Title: DJ Premier
Date: 2015-04-20
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/dj-premier-you-know-my-steez

DJ Premier
DJ Premier is an undisputed heavyweight champion of hip-hop, a native Texan whose love of hip-hop brought him to New York where he wound becoming a vital part of the music’s golden years. As one half of Gang Starr alongside the late MC Guru, and as a producer for established and upcoming talent like KRS ONE or a young Nas from Queens, Premier was responsible for shaping a hard-edged hip-hop sound in the ’90s, sample-heavy and full of incredibly memorable scratched elements.
In this lecture at the 2007 Red Bull Music Academy, Premier talks about Guru, Nas, Jay-Z, digging for samples, working with Christina Aguilera and eating KFC with a naked Notorious B.I.G.
Hosted by Jeff “Chairman” Mao Alright, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for being here. My name is Jeff Mao, AKA Chairman Mao, AKA Chairman Jefferson Mao but that’s not important, because this gentleman here is our guest, our first lecturer in this two-week term. He has worked with some of the greatest hip-hop artists of all time, he’s also produced some of the greatest hip-hop records of all time, so by those two facts you can deduce that he is one of the greatest hip-hop producers of all time. Please join me in welcoming, DJ Premier. [Applause] DJ Premier Thank you, Chairman Mao, and by the way, you are important, brother, because you are really hip-hop. Give it up for Chairman Mao, y’all. [Applause] I don’t have any Kleenex so you can blow your nose and cry and all that. Jeff “Chairman” Mao It’s a great Oprah moment right now. DJ Premier I’ll jump on the couch like Tom Cruise. There ya go. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, DJ Premier, how are you today? DJ Premier I’m good, man. Been on tour for the last three days here. Did Ottawa, then we did Montreal, then we did Hamilton last night, which was insane. All the shows have been crazy. Then we do Toronto tonight for the Red Bull Academy, big up to them, and big up to everybody that’s representing the Red Bull Academy for having me here, I’m glad to be here. Jeff “Chairman” Mao We do these lectures and we talk a little bit about creative issues but also your life and your career. I guess, just first of all, to somebody who’s been closely associated with the purist, New York hip-hop sound, maybe some folks might be surprised to notice you’re not actually from New York. Where are you from and how did you get to New York? DJ Premier Born in Houston, Texas, and then moved. My parents, my mother’s from Baltimore, Maryland, and my father’s from South Carolina. They met, they’re both teachers, my mother’s an art teacher, so that’s how I learnt to draw and do all that, by force. But now, since graffiti came out, I guess it all tied in to the hip-hop. So, thanks to my moms for that, and she’s a very big music woman, so through all of that, my upbringing... I’m 41-years-old, I was born in ’66 so I have a lot more understanding and experience of the music. To be from Texas gives me an advantage over anybody that gets into the music business in the 21st century, unless they do their homework on the origins of music that came before hip-hop. I didn’t have any rap records when I was a kid, we only had soul music. It wasn’t called R&B at the time. To me, R&B is like Mary J. Blige, stuff like that, Fantasia, Chris Brown is R&B. Soul is Barry White, Al Green, Earth Wind & Fire, The Commodores, I said Al Green, right? I didn’t put Prince in there because he came out in 1980, when soul was still important. Michael Jackson came through the soul era, so to be brought up on all those groups, Aretha Franklin, Natalie Cole, things of that nature, it all trickled down into what hip-hop is now. Well, not now, but the golden era, which, of course, was the late ’70s all the way through the ’80s. My era of being in the game was the ’90s. So, even living in Texas we really were brought up on the same type of music that was worldwide at that time. And I’ll just bring it back a little bit, my mother’s father lived in Brooklyn, so we used to go visit him all the time when I was young. Probably fifth grade, we used to always stay with him every Christmas, every Thanksgiving, every summer. My older sister was like, you know, she was tired of doing it because we were older and she wanted to hang out with her friends, but I kept wanting to go because I was just so into the whole scene. The first time I ever came to New York I saw a guy commit suicide on the subway, on the train that we were on. We ran over him and they had to back the train up off of him and he was still shaking, his arm was separated, he was still doing like this [mimes shaking] on the track and I was just like, “Wow, this is where I want to live,” you know what I’m saying? Go back and tell your friends what you did for summer and you saw a dude, you know, commit suicide, which is not a beautiful thing, but just the whole aspect of seeing that and getting off the train, this is freshly done so the cops weren’t even there yet, just the whole action and seeing the people. My grandfather was a big baseball and football fan so he used to always take me to every Yankee game when I was little, took me to the World Trade Center, the Empire State Building, so I did all of that early. So, by the time I was 13, I said, “I’m definitely going to move here,” but it still wasn’t because of hip-hop yet. I wanted to live here, period. That’s how I started to make my plans to be here once I was able to get some money up and move. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, what was your first exposure to hip-hop? I think it’s interesting because I’m from the era when, I remember before hip-hop as well, a lot of people don’t necessarily have that experience. So, what was your first exposure? DJ Premier Seeing the b-boys breaking when my grandfather took me to Times Square, we’d always go to Times Square, and that’s when it was really grimy, people were getting robbed left and right. Now it’s all cleaned up since Giuliani came into office and made it all pretty for the tourists and it’s not the same Times Square that I remember. So, during that time going into midtown and seeing all the sights and everything, all the B-boys used to be breaking for money, it was crazy. The Rocksteady Crew was one of the first people that I saw right there where the Marion Marquee is right there off 7th and like 44th. They were right there and they had the Rocksteady Crew outfits on and I was like, “Man, this is ill.” And they kept cutting up “Apache” [by the Incredible Bongo Band], you know the break part of Apache with the bongos, and then they’d go onto “It’s Just Begun” by Jimmy Castor Bunch and they had a cassette tape that was pre-made by whoever cut it up and it kept being repeated on the breakdowns, and every time it went to the breakdown another cat would go off and do his thing. So, it was fascinating and this was prior to any 12” records coming out. The way they were doing all these moves was just amazing. And then Flashdance and all that stuff kind of come out, you know, Wildstyle, seeing it again in that aspect, that’s when I was like, “I’ve got to do this professionally.” Jeff “Chairman” Mao As far as music, what was the first thing that you heard? For a lot of us it was “Rapper’s Delight,” but was the first for you or was it something else? DJ Premier It was definitely “Rapper’s Delight.” That came out in ’79. It’s the first piece of wax that ever really hit, they say “King Tim III” by the Fatback Band is the original, first hip-hop record which it did have rapping on it but for us it was “Rapper’s Delight.” We all know that. That’s my first. Jeff “Chairman” Mao How did it make you feel when you first heard it, because you’re used to hearing different soul music and now this is entering your consciousness? DJ Premier For me, it was just ill because I was a big fan of Nile Rodgers, who I just met recently at the Rock The Bells Tour with Rage Against the Machine and Public Enemy and Wu-Tang and everybody. Public Enemy’s on, I see Nile Rodgers is bopping his head on the side of the stage and I’m still sitting there going, “When they go off I’m going to walk over there and say what’s up.” I’m still like a kid, like hoping he doesn’t diss me, because if he does I’m going to diss him back. Any of my heroes, if they diss me, I’m screaming on them because I feel like I’m on that level where I appreciate them so much, don’t show me disrespect by me acknowledging how great I think you are. And he let me take a picture it’s on my MySpace page, go to MySpace, DJ Premier, and then you’ll see me with Nile Rodgers. I was such a big Chic fan, because they had their own sound. I was into people that always made their own sound. I was a big James Brown fan… I’m still addicted to James Brown to this day. I saw him in concert when I was six years-old with my mother. Me and my mother used to go to concerts all the time, we still do. She has bad knees and she’s like, “Hey, can you get tickets to Prince? Can you get tickets to Janet [Jackson]? Can you get tickets to Alicia Keys?” And if I’m in town, I go with her. But she took me to see Rufus and Chaka Kahn, I remember she took me to see the Brothers Johnson with Quincy Jones, and I was like, “I don’t want to go and see Quincy Jones.” And she was like, “Yeah, but it’s going to be a good show and they sent the Brothers Johnson on to open up.” And I was like, “Yeah,” because I was into them, because I was really into the bass a lot and the drums and I liked the way Louis Johnson played the bass so I was extra surprised. I remember we went to Rufus and Chaka Kahn and they were passing weed around and my mom was like, “Don’t take that.” They would pass it to her and she would say, “No, thank you,” and I was like, “Why would they pass cigarettes around?” She’s like, “It’s not a cigarette,” and that’s when she explained to me that it was weed, and unfortunately now I smoke weed, but anyway. Actually, not unfortunately because I love weed, but all those elements that are from her, from learning how to draw, which is creative expression, her taking me to concerts… I saw Ike & Tina Turner, I remember I got lost. For some reason, I still don’t understand because most children remember their childhood. I, for some reason, had to go to the bathroom and I didn’t go with my parents and I found the bathroom and when I came back I didn’t have my ticket stub so I couldn’t remember what aisle I was in and I started crying, and I was crying so loud even with the music on that these people who were on stage had Tina Turner announce that I was lost until my parents found me. Word! I remember that to this day that Tina Turner announced me being lost and my parents found me and they got me back in my seat and Tina went on to doing all that twisting and shaking and Ike looked like he was about to beat her ass, and you know? And now What’s Love Got To Do With It is on DVD. [Laughter] Jeff “Chairman” Mao And the rest is history, yeah. So, at Prairie View, you attended to Prairie View university in Texas? DJ Premier Where I met my man Biggest Gord, where you at Gordon, the guy that was loud earlier? Jeff “Chairman” Mao The really loud, obnoxious...? DJ Premier Yeah, the loud, obnoxious guy. He’s now one of my partners, I’ve been down with him since college and yeah, I’ll elaborate on it more but that’s where we met, in college. He’s from Brooklyn, New York. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And that’s where you formed your first group as well? DJ Premier I formed this group with my man Top-Ski, who’s from Boston, ironically, like Guru. And two of our friends that we went to college with who we all met in college. My man Anthony Benson, his name was Sugar Pop, he was from Dallas and my man Stylee T. The thing that’s so crazy about Stylee is he looked, well, he didn’t look like Flavor Flav, but he acted just like Flav and this was before we even heard of Public Enemy. Because again, this is like 1984, my freshman year in college and he was already wearing all the crazy tracksuits with the different Adidas, he had like five, six, seven pairs of Adidas with the fat laces and he used to do all these crazy moves and he was just bugged out, and he was like, “I’m just bugged out, dude.” And he’d rhyme up and do all these crazy moves and everybody loved Stylee, he was just a bug out. So, when Public Enemy came out it was like [mimes pointing at TV], “Damn, Stylee T, he’s biting our style.” But we were so into PE you couldn’t deny what they did, they did the unthinkable. But we were called MCs In Control and later we changed our name to the Inner Circle Posse, why I don’t know because I thought MCs In Control was a dope name. We formed, I used to do all the parties because I always had every record. Me and my mother used to go record shopping at least twice a month and she’d be like, “Whatever three records you want, pick it.” And I have two older sisters, I have a sister that’s four years older than me and I have sister that’s two years older than me, so those are different generation gaps where they had their stuff. My older sister was really into a lot of rock, like she was into The Eagles and she liked Carly Simon and David Bowie and things like that. She was really into The Beatles and she was into AC/DC and The Stones, you know? She liked all the black music, too, she’s a soul sister. Me and her are really tight to this day because she’s just so into everything. But she’s the one that gave me the more eclectic part of my music, the knowledge. Then, once I started going to high school – and I played football for a couple of years in high school and in junior high, before I got hurt on a motor cycle and then after that I kind of lost interest and started getting into music and stuff – but all the guys they were blasting Kiss and Styx and Rush and stuff like that. I was into that, too, and then the new-wave era came out and I was into all that, too. I was into the studded belts and everything, the crazy boots. I had boots like that and everybody knew me at school that I was really into music. So, no one looked at me like I was weird or anything like that, they always accepted me for being who I am and I never was ashamed of any of that era, because during that time, that was a rebellious era. Jeff “Chairman” Mao You had the Cold Crush Brothers’ “Punk Rock Rap” look? DJ Premier Oh, yeah. Yeah, for sure. Me and my man Charles rolled like that and if you tried to front on us, we’d smack shit out of you. So, basically, all of that and then my mother, she has a very big jazz collection, major… her father was in a jazz band. He always used to show us the tour books. I mean, the photo albums of all the places he went to, all the people he met and stuff like that and I was always fascinated by that because he used to really, really love to show them off. He’d even forget, like, “Oh, let me show you these photo books.” And I’m like, “Grandfather, you show me those every year, the same books.” But I was so into the fact that he had lived that lifestyle, I wanted to do that. He actually told me that the hip-hop thing wasn’t going to work before he died but, that’s why I got a tattoo done on my arm, “Told you I was gonna do it.” I never let that discourage me because he was just like, “That’s just a noise,” he was just from that generation of not understanding the language and the lifestyle, but I was part of that lifestyle and when that started to develop I really, really wanted to get down with hip-hop. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So how did MCs In Control evolve, or how did that group lead you to Gang Starr? DJ Premier What happened was, I said, “You know what?” It was the first summer when we were together, I moved in with Gordon’s family, him, his brother. His brother was going to go to college the next year because he was a little younger than us. It was Gordon’s first year and he was like, “Look, you can crash at our place in Brooklyn.” So, moved to East New York and moved in with his parents and again we spent the whole summer there and when we went back to school the following year, I said, “You know what? Forget it.” I wasn’t going to class, my father was the dean of arts and sciences up at my college, and it was a predominantly black college. I didn’t even know white people could get minority scholarships because I was, you know, not used to all of them, it was a black school. I just thought it was always going to be black, which it still is. So, long story short, my father moved up in the ranks from teaching, became the dean, so that means all the teachers that don’t see me show up to class at 8 o’clock in the morning because I was still drunk from the night before, partying too much and stealing at the time. All of a sudden, I look around and my father’s coming back with all these reports from the teachers telling on me that I’m not showing up to class. I remember one day, I had an 8 o’clock class and I’m missing it so much that I ended up sleeping late on one of those drunk nights when I’ve been partying too much, I doubled back and went to my father because he had an 8 o’clock class to teach. He had cancelled his class to let his class study for an exam they were going to have two days later, so he tricked me. I left when he left, took off, said, “See you later pop,” doubled back, went back to bed, all of a sudden right when I’m cozy, nice and in my bed, I hear that door go “ka-boom.” He’s back at the house and I tried to hop up but he caught me before I got out the bed, he was like, “See, I knew you was hogging it, you’re not going to classes.” That’s when me and him really had a fall-out and that’s when I really just decided to leave. I was like, “You know what?” I keep upsetting my parents, which I don’t like to do and I’m his only son, so he always used to run this, “Can you make me proud at least once to be your father?” And I was like, “Dad, that kinda hurts,” so I was like, “You know what? I’m moving.” I told Gordon I’m going to move and is it possible to stay with you a little while until I get on my feet? And I remember my father gave me $250, which my MC stole from me, which I never even knew he did until years later after we reunited and had a day to just chill together. We were all reminiscing and he was like, “Yo, remember that $250 your father sent? You know, I took that.” And I thought Gordon took it and I blamed him, we were going through our little issues but I always blamed Gordon and it was the guy I never expected, which was my man Top. When he told me that I flipped on him right there on the spot, like, “How could you do that?” Because I never thought that he could do that, you know, so long story short… Jeff “Chairman” Mao It’s always the ones you least expect... DJ Premier Yeah, man. And that actually made me sharper on just watching everybody. I became very non-[trusting] but for the right reasons. Rest in peace to Gordon’s dad, Arden Franklin, he made us get a job, “You got to get a job if you’re going to stay at my house.” I got a job at a young people’s day care as a counselor. I had no experience but they had a shortage of counselors and Top, my MC, came with me and we both got the jobs together. We actually became cool counselors, like some of the kids that we counseled are now successful in business. Two of them have their own clothing companies; they’re doing real well. Actually, when M.O.P. did the “Ante Up” video, the wardrobe that they wore was by the kid that I actually taught when he was 11 or 12 years old. And I was young, I wasn’t even 24 yet. And being that they had a shortage of manpower, they gave us the job. We used to do that every day and that’s when I went to Staten Island, I saw Ghostface Killah way back. We got into a fight in Stapleton Projects, which is where he’s from with the other kids from the daycare that were trying to fight our kids from Brooklyn. When we tried to break it up and have them fight one-on-one the older kids that were our age started telling us, “Yo, what’s up? Are you trying…?” So, then we had to get into a fight with them. It was ill. So far I’ve won every fight. I’ve gotten beat up before, no biggie, I know what it’s like to have a Timberland boot in your face and a couple of knuckles in the jaw, so once you know what it’s like you can handle anything. But I made it through all of that stuff, and then my grandfather passed. It was crazy because I was really, really doing bad financially. I was trying to really get more out on my own and I remember when my grandfather died my mother came up and she saw me in just these raggedy jeans with ink spots on them from busted ballpoint pens, you know how they bust in your pocket, and I asked her if I could borrow $40 and I’ll never forget this, I asked, “Could I borrow $40?” And she said, “You look bad, why don’t you just come home?” And plus, I had a truck that I drove. I had a little Nissan pick-up with a five-speed stick that I drove the day I moved to New York and I drove in the pouring rain with all the records that I’ve ever owned and they all got wet, the whole drive. I’m talking like it was pouring, storm pouring for almost three days straight, and my boy that rode with me, HL Rock, who became our dancer in Gang Starr, didn’t know how to drive a stick. So, I drove the whole way and we would keep making stops, we would even sleep on the side of the road with the rain still pouring over my records and I was just like, “Man, when I get to my destination I know they’re going to be ruined.” All the covers all stuck together. And not only that, I don’t condone this, but I used to work at a record store at the time and on my last day I actually packed up damn near everything in that store, because I used to lock the store up and they knew I was leaving so they gave me like a farewell party. So, while they’re in the back getting the cake ready, I’m like, “Move the boxes out, move the boxes out,” and we were taking boxes and boxes of records, so maybe that was my punishment that they got all wet. But from that time, I’ve been able to regain all those records and replace them and everything through loads and loads of digging and searching and I’ve got the majority of them back now. I’ve been through some things. Jeff “Chairman” Mao But your demo... DJ Premier Yeah, I’ll explain that. When I was in Texas I worked at a record store called Soundwaves, it was like the neighborhood store that everybody who was quote/unquote ghetto would shop at. For one, we had to all know our music. You had to know blues, you had to know zydeco, I don’t know if y’all know what zydeco music is? OK, you had to know zydeco because Louisiana and all that’s close enough so a lot of people shop there. You had to know rock, you had to know hip-hop and you had to know soul. So, being that we had to know so many genres of music, everybody was that knowledgeable. My man Carlos Garza, who already had a job there, he got me the job based on my knowledge of music. The reason why we met is because he had all the ill 12”s of anything that I wanted, but I would change the prices on them before I went up to the counter to ring up the records and he caught me and I still denied it. I was like, “I didn’t change the prices, your machine was wrong when you priced them. I’m paying for...” They was like four dollars a 12” and I put $1.99 because they had a bad price machine so they were easy to peel off and just put another price, so I’d go to like the CD cleaning things and the little record cleaning spray and peel those off, while my boy Top would hold me down and act like he’s shopping and ask some questions to distract them and I changed all the prices so when he’d ring them up he’d be like, “Hang on, these don’t cost $1.99,” and I’d put up a fuss and they’d bring me up because I just kept defending the fact that whatever’s on the tag is what you pay for. I went outside to go to my car and he was like, “Yo man, I know you changed the prices.” He said, “I ain’t gonna say nothing but why are you doing that?” And that’s how we got cool and he got me a job there. It’s crazy because I remember the boss there, the owner, Terry, was a major cokehead, he was a big cokehead. We knew but we found out he damn near almost made the store go under because he sniffed up almost $80,000 worth of coke on the store’s money. It’s crazy, too, because I even learned about how to watch people from Terry, because he used to say, “Yo, whenever anybody walks into that store, when you hear that little bell, go over the door, look at everybody in the eye and say, ’Hey, how you doing?’ so that they know you looked at them walk in.” Because that’s when CDs were just starting to bubble, so people used to try and stuff them in their pants and stuff, so you made sure you watched everybody so that they at least know that you made eye contact. He said, “I don’t care if they get annoyed, always ask them do they need something.” So, those little things, even the deli that I go to, to this day… I go there when I come out the gym, and these guys have 10 people working there, and there might be five of us in there, and they don’t pay attention to the door. I kind of gave them that advice, so now when I come in there they all look. Because I told them… Terry taught me this, the key is to get everybody in and get everybody out so that you have free time to relax or to do something else to keep the store operating. Those are things that apply to my work now. So, when it came to my demo, I made a demo just for fun, you know? I made it for the purpose of doing records, but I was still shy and not really, really confident about being picked to be an artist. So, we just did it in the crib and then when we stayed with Gordon, his next-door neighbor, my man Skeet, he was in a house group called Total Science, he used to let me borrow his four-track, taught me how to work it and I was like, “Oh, I can overlap my beats.” So, I would actually cut the beat for five minutes non-stop, then the next track I’d layer a horn over it or a little scratch and now I have four tracks and everything I’d just get Top to rap on it. When we did the demo, we went back to school again, and Carlos used to be the 12” buyer at the time so he was the one that would be like, “Let me get three Gang Starr 12”s, let me get ten Tone Loc “Wild Thing”s, let me get 30 Milli Vanillis, because he knew how much we could move and he taught me how to be the buyer. I ended up being the buyer after that. So, I’d order “South Bronx” and “The Bridge” from MC Shan, and Whodini and records like that. During that time Carlos used to still report to all the independent hip-hop companies and he told Stu Fine at Wild Pitch, “Hey, this guy…” I was called Waxmaster C at that time, because my name is Chris and everyone had Jam Master or Grandmaster… I just wanted some type of master so I was like Waxmaster C… and he told them about me. So Stu said, “Man, I got this group Gang Starr that has three members right now but they’re really not getting along with each other. The DJ is fighting with the MC, the other MC doesn’t like the rhymes, and the other guy is really great but he just needs a tight team.” So, I was like, “Tell him I’ll be in the group,” and he was like, “Yeah, but...” I wanted my guys to be in the group with them so it’d be like Top, me and we’d join him and help him out, and he wasn’t trying to see that. So, then I said, “Alright, I’m not interested, let’s try to shop my group.” They heard the demo and the demo happened to run across Stu Fine’s office, but they were just a husband-and-wife company, so they had nobody to really A&R for them. So Guru used to listen to all the demos, and Carlos copied my cassette tape demo and snuck it to New York, which I didn’t know he was going to do, because he kept trying to get me to do it anyway and I was like, “No, I’m not ready yet, I’m not on that level yet.” And, all of a sudden, he was like, “Man, I’ve got to tell you something. I sent that cassette but they like it.” And I was like, “For real?” And they were like, “Hey, we’re going to fly you up, I went back and stayed with Gordon again, and me and Top went up there. Sugar Pop couldn’t really go at the time, but they
didn’t like Top’s voice, they were like, “Nah, he doesn’t have any flow.” So, I was like, “Well, put us in a real studio and maybe we can make it sound better.” Went to the real studio, still didn’t like it and I was like, well, I still wasn’t interested. Still stayed in New York, I remember me and Gordon, he took me everywhere, he took me to BLS, and I saw Marley Marl open the door to wait for Heavy D to walk in. And Heavy D, they were about to do “We Write The Songs” on In Control Volume 1 with Biz [Markie]. They were like, “Yeah, we’re still waiting for Biz to get here.” I’m like, “Wow, Biz is coming.” And that’s the era. I remember Heavy D had on an all-grey sweatsuit, the regular grey sweats that people wear he had the matching grey top, and he had the big fat dookie cable underneath, but you could see it bulging out the neck and I was like, “Damn, this is real.” I’m just sitting there shaking like this with my cassette. Of course, once they popped up I stopped shaking because I don’t let nobody see me sweat no matter how nervous I get, but I just held the tape and I just stood there holding it to give to Marley and I never gave it to him. I just remember he opened the door and he said, “Yo, is that you?” He was like, “Yeah, Biz is on his way.” He just kind of looked at me, and I just kind of stood there with the cassette. He closed the door and me and Gordon walked out and I was just like, “Damn, why didn’t I give him the tape?” I went up there another time, saw Marley, gave him the tape, saw him again he said he didn’t like it. He said it wasn’t up to par, so went back to the drawing board, made another demo, and it was way better. That’s where I had a record called “Let My DJ Get Hyped,” which turned into “DJ Premier In Deep Concentration” on the first Gang Starr album No More Mr Nice Guy. At that time pretty much everyone talked about, “My DJ, my DJ, my DJ...” The DJ always gets his little solo part and he gets to go off so that turned into that. We had another record called “We’re Fantastic” and we had another one called “Up Another Level”, which happened to be the big record that made them want to sign me. But I was still like, “Give Top another chance,” and they said, “We really don’t wanna do that, we really just want you.” He said to me, “Why don’t you come out with us all tonight and meet Guru?” So I met him, well, no it was Key T at that time so it was like, “Come meet Key T.” I was like, “Alright.” We went to a club called The World, and I remember Busy Bee performed that night, Melle Mel, Kool G Rap, Ice Cream Tee, and who else? There was somebody else who performed, but just to see all of them at a show, at a club like that and I’m like, “Damn!” I remember Ultramagnetic [MCs] walked in with all these walkie talkies, they all had mink coats on and the Dapper Dan stuff and the Louis Vuitton and the hats and I was like, “Man, they look just like the cover!” I was around all of this like, “Damn, I’ve got to do this.” So, during that time, me and Guru had a good vibe with each other, I explained to him my situation of why I didn’t want to be in the group. Couple of months passed and Top pretty much got fed up and was like, “Yo, this stuff is not going to work.” He was like, “Yo, I’m going to go into the military.” And I was like, “Yeah, alright.” And he signed up when I didn’t really know he was going to do it, and I remember for some reason, Gordon was not there, I was the only one at the house that day, and I remember the recruiting officer came, knocked on the door and said, “Yeah, I’m looking for Theodore Campbell.” And I was like, “For what?” He said, “Oh, he registered to go to the navy, and we’re here to get him.” And I was like, “Top?” And he goes, “Yeah, I told you I was leaving and you thought I was bullshitting.” He had all his bags packed, and I was like, “Wow, so you’re leaving me?” And I was like, “How long have you been enlisted for?” And he was like, “For four years.” And I was like, “Oh man, now what am I going to do?” So, now that he’s not here for four years, I ain’t waiting. And then I called, said, “Yo, my man left.” But that shows my loyalty, I was not down until that happened because I was like, “Damn man, you’re not sticking it out with me so now I’m all by myself.” So that’s why I called them back and they said, “Yo, we want you in the group.” So No More Mr Nice Guy is more like my resume album because me and them had to get our chemistry together to learn how to make an album together, because Guru already had experience making records with other producers, with 45 King and with Donald D. So, they already had like three 12”s out prior to me joining the group. So, with that, my process of how I made my demos is not how they do it in a real studio. I remember the first day I came in the studio I brought Gordon and his brother Gary and I came in there all hardcore and looking like I was ill, I had my hat on all broke down and I was like, “Yo, set my turntables up so that we can start recording.” And I remember my man, the engineer, Shlomo Sonnenfeld at Such-A-Sound Studios, he was an Israeli dude, he was like, “You’re not setting those turntables up for like another week, you don’t need that.” And I was like, “What? You better set my shit up,” and Guru’s trying to explain… because I’d never made a record. So I’m like, “No, set my shit up,” and I’m all like just Mr Arrogant and you know that humbled me, because now I had to learn that the process of recording is totally different, which now I totally know the process of recording. So, from there that’s how me and Guru connected and became the new Gang Starr. Jeff “Chairman” Mao And the first record you did together? DJ Premier “Words I Manifest.” I said to him I had to go back to school again, one more time, really to tie up some loose ends and I sent him the beat. I was really into jazz samples because no one really capped those, it was the James Brown era. It was like, if you didn’t have a James Brown loop you weren’t in the loop, basically. No one was really messing with jazz samples, and being in my mother’s place so often and my grandfather was in a jazz band I figured, “Let me see how to put hardcore beats to those types of sounds,” being that they were instrumental. I wasn’t on a jazz mission or anything like that because we started to get labeled as jazz rap. And to me jazz rap means you rap about jazz and we did two records. We did one dedicated to both of our grandfathers called “Jazz Music” and that was the dedication record. Spike Lee heard that record when he was filming Mo’ Better Blues because he saw the “Words I Manifest” video and he was like, “Yo, I want you to do a more in depth description of what you did on your first album but you didn’t name a lot of people you should have named.” So he gave Guru a long poem… and Guru just took the names and reworded it with his own little flow to it and we did that for Mo’ Better Blues. And from there that’s how we got signed to Chrysalis, because of that. So I remember when we did that record, the Step In The Arena album, the first single they were like, “So yeah, we can’t wait to hear the first single.” And the first single was “Just To Get A Rep,” which was some grimy hardcore shit, and they were like, “No, no, no, we want something like ‘Jazz Thing.’” And we were like, “That record was done for the movie. You want to make a movie about ducks quacking, we can make a record about that and still make it funky.” And they thought our first record was going to be based on that. Because then US 3 came out, Digable Planets came out, so it was kind of like this little jazz craze thing and it was confusing what Gang Starr stood for. That’s when I started rebelling and I said, “You know what? I’m going to start stripping things down and making everything raw and crazy,” and that’s when I tried to expand my production style. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Well, let’s interject this briefly and just play a little bit of each of those two records. So, you can get a little flavor for what we’re talking about. (music: Gang Starr - “Words I Manifest” (Remix)) DJ Premier That was my first record. And the crazy thing was, I remember when Marley Marl played it first, the original not the remix, but I just remember Stu Fine going, “Marley’s playing it right now,” and also we turned to Red Alert. At that time, if Red Alert and Marley Marl was playing your record, I don’t care what, you made it. That means you made it because Red Alert was like, “I don’t like that one, I don’t like that one, I don’t like that one,” and when he played “Manifest” we was just like, “Oh, man.” Jeff “Chairman” Mao What about Chuck Chillout? DJ Premier Chuck, too. I mean, Chuck was on Friday nights on 98.7 Kiss, Red Alert was on Saturday nights, Marley Marl was on Friday and Saturday nights with Mr Magic. It was crazy, because no matter what we were doing, when we used to hang out and stuff like that we would always make sure we were home to catch the mix. I mean, you even had drug dealers that we knew in the hood that would be like, “Yo, I’m going back to tape the mix.” They would come right back out at midnight when everything was over with the cassette of that show and put that big radio on the corner and be doing whatever they were doing. That’s how ill it was… to have the freshest new joints out on the street you had to listen to those mix shows. Now, when you listen to mix shows on any radio station they are playing all kinds of junk and no one is breaking the records no more, everything is based on what everybody else thinks is hot. They were playing stuff based on what they thought was hot. And I do that to this day. I have a radio show every Friday night on Sirius Satellite radio from midnight to two eastern time. Me and Big Shug from Gang Starr Foundation co-host it and the show’s called Live From HeadQCourterz and I’m doing the same thing that they used to do, which is to break new records based on my ear. I don’t care if anybody in here likes a record and I don’t, I won’t play it. I have to like it. And if I like it, it’s getting played. I think that helps bringing the bar back up to quality music being brought to the game. Right now the bar is on the ground so anybody can step over it and make a record. My grandfather could still make a record and sell it. And everybody’s started saying they’ve got mixtapes; if you’re not scratching or cutting or doing some mixing on it, that’s not a mixtape. It’s just a compilation CD, you know what I’m saying? I’m kind of glad, not for DJ Drama and for Cannon, those are my boys, but just the fact that they cracked down on the mixtape game made it go back to making it hard to accept everybody making mixtapes. Now, everybody’s scared to make them so I’m putting all mine out. Buy my mixtapes because they are authentic and they still represent the definition of a mixtape. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Speaking of that, you had a mixtape recently called [No Talent Required] and you had some images on the cover? DJ Premier Yeah, actually my man Charles the Mixologist, he rents a room out of the studios we have, HeadQCourterz studios, which used to be D&D Studios, they went out of business and I re-opened it. I sold my own house and put a lot of money into the studio. I knew there was going to be a lot of upkeep and money to go through it. I can always get another house so I said, “You know what? I’ll move, I’ll put my money into the studio because I believe at the moment that’s what we have to do.” So, I rented one of the rooms out to Charles because he was more of a pop producer and DJ, he was on the radio for 11 years and he knows his hip-hop as well and he said… I’m really into titles and naming the albums and things like that and I told him I wanted to call it No Talent Required because that’s how I felt about all of these people doing Serato
[mixes]. I even put a Serato box on the front because all these DJs now, they don’t own more than a hundred records and they have 20,000 records in their Serato. I see people in clubs watch and literally see what a guy clicks on and write it down on a piece of paper, in all the hot clubs, in clubs that Paris Hilton and all them go to. And then all of a sudden you come to the club three weeks later and that guys DJing and you go, “How did he get here?” But they undercut the price. And if you’re going to undercut and give them exactly the same music that they want to hear, you’re going to get the jobs. But they don’t bring them in the same way, they don’t mix them right, their timing is off, they just button-push 24/7. I have Serato and I use it, too, but Grand Wizard Theodore and Jazzy Jeff, they was just stressing and praying, “You earned it, you need to have one because you’ve carried records for years, you own thousands and thousands and thousands of records.” He was like, “I bet you have five or six storage spaces,” and I do, for the records, because I’ve bought and collected that much – besides the ones I took from the record store that time. But through all of that, to me Serato should be earned. So even although I put it on the box, on the cover of the mixtape, it wasn’t to diss Serato and Rane and all of them because I love their equipment, it was really for those that understood what my meaning was, and on top of that it should be earned. For all of us that’s been carrying these heavy speakers, I know you can attest to that Blaq, you’ve been carrying systems for years, lugging stuff and bruising your legs, sore from late nights of having to haul that stuff home and up mad stairs, just on your own. That stuff really, really does take a toll on your passion for being a DJ. Blaq has crates and crates and crates of records totally separate from mine so the knowledge and all the passion that we put into it, that’s kind of like our little gift. We got you something that can alleviate all of this, here’s this machine. But now, everybody’s on it and when I see somebody on Serato I’m looking for some skills. Put some skill into it. I still cut and do routines. I’m still a little rusty on it because I’m used to pulling records and it’s still weird to me but I’m getting better at it. That’s the thing, my aim is to be a master at it. Like DJ AM, that guy’s a master at that thing. I’m seeing him hitting buttons, spinning, but he’s still working the turntables like a DJ, so you’re not bored of just seeing a guy play a record and just sit there. So I interact and do all of that and I do routines that I used to do with my vinyl and I do them on Serato. It doesn’t take any talent to have one of those things because anybody can just push the button and let the record go. Me? I just don’t feel like I am giving you your money’s worth if I just do that so I want to be a master. I saw Jazzy Jeff cut it up on there, Cash Money, who are incredible DJs to begin with and still do what they did, that’s when I was convinced and I was like, “OK, I’ve just got to master it, and then I’m going to do the same thing.” And I’m getting better at it. Y’all will see tonight. If I mess up, excuse me. Jeff “Chairman” Mao It’s funny, because you mentioned earning the right to be able to use that or paying some dues, and that’s a big thing with hip-hop. So is that one of the things in general that you think is an issue with how hip-hop is, as far as how it has evolved over the years? It’s something different to how it was. You really had to work to find it, to get into it, and all of the things you were talking about before, swiping the records from the shop, doing whatever. DJ Premier If you don’t really care about the history of hip-hop culture, don’t mess with it. Buy whatever little albums you buy and play them, they are probably the albums we don’t like anyway, but you should really, really respect the history. I was just saying this earlier in another interview, the guy who was interviewing me was like, “You are the godfather,” and I’m like, “No, I am not. Stop. Afrika Bambaataa is the godfather.” And he was like, “Yeah, but you are too.” And I was like, “No.” He said, “In the mafia they have different godfathers.” And I said, “Well, this ain’t the mafia, this is hip-hop and the godfather is Afrika Bambaataa and the father is Kool Herc. That’s it.” And he was like, “What about [Russell Simmons? Ain’t he the godfather too?” And I was like, “Nope. He is one of the illest moguls and one of the illest to set up Def Jam, and I praise Russell all the way for making Def Jam what it was when it was raw, but he ain’t no godfather. It’s Afrika Bambaataa and Kool Herc is the father, hands down.” There’s nothing else to say. Think about it, if everyone that loves hip-hop gave them a dollar each, they’d be straight. Just one dollar, just to say thank you for creating this whole thing. I remember one day, when the Palladium used to be open in New York, do you remember how ill that was? I remember when Missy was just coming out with “I Can’t Stand The Rain” and I was like, “Damn, there goes Missy,” and Kool Herc was walking up to her to say, “Hey Missy, I want to just introduce myself,” and I stood right there and they were like, “Hey Missy, this is Kool Herc,” and she was like, “Oh hey, how you doing?” And just walked off. I just looked at her like, “I don’t like Missy any more,” you know what I mean? Kool Herc! You supposed to go, “Kool Herc! Yo! Much respect, thank you,” or something. She was just like, “Yeah, hi.” And she’s always wearing the shell toes and trying to bring it back with the fat chain and the sweatsuits of that era. So, I’ve always had that bad taste in my mouth, even though she’s a good producer, she’s a good writer, but those things really mean something to me. So again with all the clothes that she’s wearing to show respect to the era of ’86 and all that. If you don’t give Kool Herc his props or you don’t at least say, “Thank you brother for what you did,” and you just give him a cold, “Yeah, how you doing?” – like that. I am never going to forget that, that’s like a stain in my brain. Very, very wrong. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Recently, when James brown passed away, there was a memorial at the Apollo Theatre. DJ Premier I was there. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Did you go with Kid Capri? Fab 5 Freddy? DJ Premier No, I didn’t go with them. We skipped the line, and everybody started chanting, “We were here first. We were here first!” And I was like, “But I’m going in now,” because Afrika Bambaataa had some pull with Al Sharpton, and he was able to get us finagled into the front line. I was in Texas for Christmas, for the holidays, to see my family. I always go home and see my same friends and they don’t treat me like “Oh, you’re Premier,” they treat me like Chris and all my other nicknames. I have a lot of nicknames at home, so everybody that knows me sees me come home for the holidays we always go out, we always do the same things we used to do with all of our friends and everybody in my neighborhood. We’re all like the same age and we all used to do a lot of stuff together, male and female, and we all still get together and do our same stuff. It’s just a beautiful thing because it’s the same treatment that we give to each other whenever I go home, so I love it. When it came to James Brown, Showbiz, well, actually Teflon from MOP’s family first called me and said, “Yep, they gonna have his body at the Apollo day after tomorrow,” and I was like, “Are you serious?” And he was like, “Yeah!” I was like, “I wanna go,” and he was like, “Yeah, I wanna go, too, let me know.” I called Showbiz and he said, “Oh, you heard about James Brown? You going?” I was like, “Yeah, I’ll go if you go.” So I was like, “I’m going.” And, man, I was like, “We’re going early.” I called Jazzy Jay from the Zulu Nation and he said, “Yeah man, we get in because Bambaataa’s got a little hook-up with Al Sharpton. He’s the one bringing the body up.” And I was like, “Oh yeah, I got to go.” I saw DJ Scratch from EPMD there and Tichina Arnold, who plays the mother on Everybody Hates Chris, and of course she was in Martin and all that stuff, she was there. I was with Shubee from the Crash Crew and Grand Wizard Theodore, who, of course, if ya’ll don’t know invented scratching, and a couple of other people, and I’m such a James Brown fan. We got there when they brought the body there and everybody was going, “James Brown! James Brown!”, while they were bringing it in and, on top of that, even old ladies who are in walkers and wheelchairs were making excuses and trying to get to the front and I was like, “Mam, I know you want to get through here, I am not letting you through.” They were making excuses like, “Oh, my daughter’s dying and she has to see him.” And I was like, “She can see him, but after us. You stay right here.” I wasn’t letting anyone past me, nobody, because if you didn’t want to go, they had a thing where you could walk down the street and just keep on moving. Everybody’s like, “I’m trying to get through here because I’m trying to go home.” I was like, “Well, if you’re trying to go home, go all the way back,” but me and Shubee from Crash Crew we were like stopping everybody. People in wheelchairs, gurneys, you could be on your death bed, I was like, “No, we’re going there first, you all have to stay right here.” I’ve never been that rude to anybody, but this is James Brown. I walked in there and saw him in that casket. I mean, who’s excited to see a dead person in a casket? But I was that excited, like, “That’s him!” And they let us get really close, like really, really close and I was just staring at him like, “That’s James!” I met him before at the BET Awards, and got to shake his hand but that final look, just to be right there and go there he is, it was like going to a concert. It was crazy. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So, there was some representation from hip-hop? DJ Premier All of us. Jeff came with us, we took some ill pictures under the Marquee where it had “Rest in peace, James Brown” and just the energy there was just so crazy. I remember they were playing “Superbad” real loud, and when he goes “Watch me! I got it!”, everybody was bopping and singing and the sound system was so loud, and everybody was just blasting James. It was just so dope. It was one of the illest experiences I ever had. Jeff “Chairman” Mao You have mentioned before we got onto some of these other subjects how you changed your production style from what the label expected and it was “Just To Get A Rep” and you stripped it down after that. Go into a little of the mindset behind that and how you define your style for how most people know it today. DJ Premier For one, as I said earlier when we started this interview, was just the fact that everybody that I appreciated in music was different. I was a big Prince fan, I went to all his concerts before he had 1999 out, when he had “I Want To Be Your Lover” and everybody be like, “Oh, he’s gay, he’s talking about I want to be your mother and your sister, all of that, and he wears panties and boots.” I was like, “Nah, he’s a player, he gets women.” I knew, that’s just his image, he’s not gay. I knew Prince was just an amazing dude and he always had B-sides on his 45s, because at that time 45s were being sold and he always had a song on the B-side, and he always had extended versions and 12” versions with songs that weren’t on the album, back then. Before 1999, before Purple Rain and all that, so I was like, “Man, if I ever make a record…” and again, this was just some dream thoughts, “...if I ever make a record, I’m going to do the same thing: B-sides, stuff not on the album, just those same incentives that make you want to buy stuff.” I remember sometimes I’d not be able to go and pick up Prince’s new album, I’d call up my man Meatball – you know, us country folks have crazy names – my man Meatball I used to be like, “Yo, you get the Prince album yet? I mean the 12”?” He was like, “Yeah, I got it.” “Any B-sides?” “Yeah, it’s got “17 Days” or “Gotta Stop Messing About” on the back of the “Let’s Work” 12”. I was like, “Damn, I can’t wait to see you this afternoon so I could play it.” And we’d go over and listen to all the vinyl and stuff. So him, like I said, James Brown, they all had their own style. From the family I grew up in, my mother’s very well respected in our community, everybody knows my pops very well, and again what he said in my head about, “Make me have a reason to be proud of you,” I said, “I’m going to be original with my stuff too.” So I’ve always dared to be different, you’ve got to be different in order to stand out. People might not get it right away, but they’ll eventually get it if you believe in what you’re doing. That’s really my MO to this day. When it came down to the label sitting me down and trying to tell me what they expected out of me, I said, “I can’t follow something that is not going to make me feel right with myself.” So either drop me from the label and I’ll regroup and get back on my feet but I’d rather get cut off from money and everything else to keep my integrity alive because, eventually, if you stand your ground you’re going to get yours. I always stood my ground when it came to my music. I never, not even once, compromised. And that’s the reason why I think I’m still here doing what I do. [Applause] It gets a little rough and a lot of doors get slammed in your face when you don’t compromise and it gets around, “Oh, he doesn’t give in.” But why be a give-in type of artist when they’re just going to manipulate you and spit you out anyway? Because that’s what they’re going to do, you know? So Kanye is a good example, he’s standing up for whatever it is he wants to believe in so he knows he could face a rocky road. I saw an interview, he was like, “I’m not going on MTV no more, ever,” and all that and a lot can go wrong with that when you’re really sticking to that type of stance. But, if you’re willing to take the consequence, then do it. I agree with him. I’m just not in that same predicament, so I already know MTV don’t play by our particular type of book, unless you’re hot. So in his case it may actually work for his benefit, as long as his music stays pumping. Right now, he’s doing his thing and I congratulate him on his new album but they spelled my name wrong, they put an “e” on the end and I’m pissed off at Kanye about that but, you know… spell my name right, man. But it’s all good. At the end of the day his music’s good and people are going to buy it however they spell my name. Just please don’t put an “e” on the end whenever you spell Premier. I appreciate it. Jeff “Chairman” Mao So what do you think was the turning point for you as far as defining that style as far as music goes? What song represented that for you? DJ Premier You mean what song after using jazz samples? Jeff “Chairman” Mao Yeah, and after Step In The Arena and getting to the point of Daily Operation and everything? DJ Premier Hard To Earn, 1993. That’s when I really was like, “Bring on any artist, I’ll take any artist and I’ll turn them into a hot record.” I hadn’t met KRS-One, who was one of the people I idolized in the game. If he had asked me to produce him when those first three Gang Starr albums had come out from ’89 to ’92 and Daily Operation and Take It Personal and “DWYCK” was out, I wouldn’t have been confident to work with any artist outside of Guru. Guru always let me do really leftfield tracks, and he would rhyme on them. He wasn’t like, “Oh, I can’t rhyme to this,” he was always willing to go leftfield. My leftfield tracks I like more… they might not have been a hit out of what we’ve done but I always liked the ones that have been a little not normal, so to speak. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Anything on this list you want to play? DJ Premier You could play “Question Remains” and you know what’s so crazy? It’s number five. You know what the crazy thing about “Question Remains” is? That’s one of my records that got damaged in the rain, so it was stuck top the paper that was inside the sleeve when I peeled it out. You know, I wiped it with alcohol and everything, but all the little soiled pieces were caught up in it that’s why when it comes on, that’s a very common sample from Bob James, when the record starts it’s actually going [makes record crunching noise]. But it just sounded dope so all that static is in the record because it was damaged, but I kept chopping it and kept starting it over right at that one little stab and then I just pitched it down one time and Guru was like, “Yo, let’s just leave it like that.” Jeff “Chairman” Mao OK, let’s listen to “The Question Remains” by Gang Starr. (music: Gang Starr – “The Question Remains”) DJ Premier Sometimes, when I make a beat I actually hear the beat in my head but I don’t have any samples yet that I’m going to use, so I start looking for samples that sound like what I’m hearing in my head. If I’m working with Christina Aguilera, good example, what she told me she wanted out of me to blend in with her style and I wasn’t really a fan of hers. I knew she could sing very well but I wasn’t really into her type of music. But who wasn’t familiar with “Genie In A Bottle” and “What A Girl Wants,” doing the “Lady Marmalade” record with Kim and Pink and Mya? So, I knew those records and I knew of course “Beautiful,” which was a dope record. It’s like, it doesn’t matter who it is, I just start playing things in my head. He can attest to that too [pointing into audience]. Blaq’s been around me a long time. He’s actually the first person I begged to get a record deal because he had an independent label back in ’85, 1984/’85, called Black Magic records. I was like, “You can’t sign me?” And he was, “I’m a small company, that’s not how it works,” because I didn’t understand the business side of making records. He was doing it out of his own pocket and he actually put out Mr Freeze, who ended up producing Bell Biv DeVoe. Spyderman and Freeze, he was the first one to put them out. Because they were from the same neighborhood, and then that started them doing “Poison” and all that, they became big producers, did Color Me Badd “I Wanna Sex You Up” and became very major. So, during that time people failed to realize that with me, I’ll sit there sometimes and be bopping, doing this funny sound that I do, and he’ll even be like, “Oh boy, he’s doing that again,” he knows what I’m doing. I’ll be having a conversation and completely stop talking and just do that and I do it to this day but I’m just playing something in my head. And I’ll start digging around for samples, I call it rush digging. Sometimes, I take my time and dig, sometimes I’ll just drop the needle and look, literally just randomly searching. When I dig, I dig in different ways. I like to read artists to see what they play, what instrumentation, I like to see if it’s a producer that I admire and respect and be like, “Oh man, I didn’t know he did this song, he was on this record,” and that means I admire their musicianship so I apply that, start looking for sounds. Sometimes I listen to the whole record because I enjoy listening to it. There are records I could have sampled and made beats off that I just won’t because I just like the music so much just to listen to, I don’t want to tamper with it. If I’m quick digging, like with “Question Remains” everyone has that Bob James album to sample, we kind of know what everybody got. There’s records where it’s like everybody’s got this album. I don’t even need to know who you are, I know that record is in everybody’s possession, if you go digging. So, to mess with that record for “Question Remains” that’s not really a record that I would touch, because I already expect 40 other people to have it. Because the original goes [sings], and everybody knows that loop. So, to take that one bar, it’s not really a bar it’s actually half a bar and I just keep going, [sings], and I didn’t really want to keep on doing that. So, that’s why I pitched it to make it go [sings], but I did that in my head and just pitched it down, put it on a different pad and then flip-flopped from then. We were putting out “Suckas Need Bodyguards” as a single and a video for that album. And again, I was all about the B-side that is not on the album so the DJs could be like, “Man, they always look out for us with a new record,” because if an albums already in the store and you’re already familiar with it, to have a new single with a new record is going to go to force you to buy it even if you’ve already got the album because it was like, “Man, I can’t get it no other way but through the vinyl.” That’s when vinyl was still in a good place in hip-hop. They had already started to try and phase vinyl out but when it came to hip-hop they couldn’t really stop it, because it’s part of our format and it still is. Again, I like how Serato has preserved our format to where we can still get back to cutting it up on 1200s and it keeps the whole thing alive, it’s just I think the right people need to have their hands on it. That was just an easy little loop, we had the record done that day. It was just a one day recording session because when it comes to singles, when you pick singles off your album and you go into the studio to do a recording session for a new record, major record companies don’t want to wait another week for you to do a new song. They’re like, “Look, unless you’re just multi-, multi-, multi-platinum…” – and we weren’t that so it has to be done – they’re like, “We’ll just master tomorrow and just go with that one single.” And we’re like, “No, we need something new.” And in their eyes, it’s like, “For what? Just pick another song off the album.” It’s like, “No, you don’t understand, it has to be a B-side.” They said, “Alright, well, as long as it’s ready by tomorrow we’ll accept it. If not, we’re not taking it.” And they never made us pull anything or anything like that, it just has to be ready. So, we knocked it out in one day and we went on tour the next day. No, actually we shot the video the next day and we went on tour the following day. It all got done and “Question Remains” is definitely one of my favorite tracks of all time. As simple as it is, the feel of it and all the little things like I said about the record being dirty and trying to clean it up by accident because that’s the best I could get. I could have bought a clean copy but it sounded good with the static in it. Hip-hop is grimy and dirty, so keep it dirty. Jeff “Chairman” Mao At a certain point that style of just chopping and flipping something, a very small piece of music, you became very well-known for and a lot of people started emulating that at certain points. When that started happening what was your thought process as far as everybody jumping on that bandwagon? DJ Premier From there, I started doing less, more what we call stabs, stabs are just [sings], we call those stabs because it’s just a short dash. I started doing stab-type samples just to strip down more because, again, back in the day, sometimes it was just [does vocal stab] and the rest of it was all drum beat with the DJ going off, so I started doing stabs then everybody started getting into that. So now I’m going back into my jazz samples again because no one’s really tampering with that, so you’re going to start hearing a lot of that again. Now, it’s like now I’m going back to everything that I know that I didn’t know then that just happened to come out how it did and now. Kind of like Large Professor. I don’t know if you’re all familiar with Large Professor, right? Well, you know how they call him the “Mad Scientist?” I’ve been in sessions with this guy way back when he did Kool-G Rap & Polo’s album Wanted Dead Or Alive, he did all those beats. I know Eric B took all the credit but Large Professor, I watched him do that whole album. Eric B put all the 808s on it. He went back in and, I guess to get his credit, he put 808s on every record. Large Professor didn’t want it on every song, because he had a certain way of laying his stuff down, but when he was doing all those beats I remember when he thinks something is hot that he’s about to lay he has this sinister laugh that he does where everybody’s looking at him going, “Is he alright? He’s tripping over there.” He’ll start going [sinister laughter], and everybody’s looking at him like, “Yo, what’s up with this dude?” But I kind of do that too. I don’t do that but I kind of do have this laugh, like, “Oh man, wait ’til I…” It’s a scientifical thought, it really is. People got to realize that we’re doing surgery or we’re in a laboratory putting chemicals together, so you don’t want anybody to distract that chemistry. But he used to always do that and construct his beats and then he’d be like, “Yo, check this out now,” and he’d hit play and you’d just look at him like, “How you do that?” Even learning from him, I’m coming from Texas with a whole different mentality of how to do this… these guys were already doing it and they were the up-and-comers. I heard the Nas record before the album was done and I was like, “This guy’s going to be the next thing,” when he did “Live At The Barbecue.” So, again, I always put in that scientific thought process any time I go into the studio and work on a record, and I play the beat in my head, look for samples that happen to match what I hear or something close to it, maybe not exact but close to it, and I just turn it into something. Sometimes I’ll start looking for samples, hear one that’s dope but it won’t go with the track I’m working on so I’ll just mark it and set it aside and be like, “I’m going to come and make a beat out of that later.” I found five samples I really wanted to use just the other day and made those five beats, and the one that I have a deadline on I still can’t come up with because everything that I’m looking for doesn’t fit the vision that I hear in my head. But now I got these other five beats. There was one I was playing yesterday and everybody was like, “Yo, what is that?” And I’m like, “That’s for so-and-so now, because I still can’t come up with the one that I intended to do.” But that’s how it is when I hear something I think I can use that with this or I can make a beat out of that, I just set it aside and I come back to it. If I’m making a single that’s when I really get stuck. When I make a single I really go even deeper, because I know what a hip-hop single should sound like. I don’t care if it’s club-oriented or just straight gutter, underground single, I know how to make singles now. Because every single that we made for Gang Starr, Group Home, Jeru, Big Shug, we designed ourselves so for “Mass Appeal”, “Just To Get A Rep,” “DWYCK,” “Take It Personal,” “Step In The Arena,” “Suckas Need Bodyguards” to “Livin’ Proof,” “Supa Dupa Star,” we always went in to make a single. That’s why most of our singles are always made last. We just do the album and then we do the single last, so that that way once that’s kicking, the album’s already turned in we can get the art work done and the album’s ready to roll. For those that don’t know, when you do art work for albums, the vinyl art work takes forever to get made because of the duplication and the size of the covers and the stamping of the vinyl. CDs you can do in a matter of hours, that’s why the artwork they have to have ready, they have to know what’s the name of the songs, and the producers, because all of that printing everything up is what takes the longest to do. The records can be done literally, like I say, even with vinyl, can be done just like that so all of that used to play in our head. But we always made sure our singles were literally as soon as it’s done they go right out to radio. So far, every one we picked happened to work. Jeff “Chairman” Mao What kind of stories can you share with us about some of these famous folks you work with? DJ Premier About some of the famous folk? I don’t know, let me see what you have on your paper. Jeff “Chairman” Mao I don’t know I got nothing on this paper, I mean you worked on Illmatic? DJ Premier I remember a funny thing with Nas, when he came in to work on Illmatic, he came in with a whole big entourage of his boys. They was all excited, I’m sure they were like, “We’re going to see Premier today,” because they was more of the young guys. Jay-Z, he was more the younger generation to me, there it wasn’t like, “Oh wow, Jay-Z,” and I knew Jay already. I met Nas prior too. Large Professor kept on telling me he was going to be ill and then, once I heard “Barbecue,” he was right, I was convinced. But every time Nas would go in the booth, he’d be like, “All of y’all come in with me,” and they’d go in the booth and there’s like ten or 15 of them in there and it’s like, “What are y’all gonna do?” And you listen to all the records we did you can hear all of them in the background on every record. On “New York State Of Mind,” on “Represent,” you can hear all of them in the background. They were all in the booth, passing blunts around and they were all around Nas as he spits. It was the first time I’d ever seen somebody do it like that. They weren’t even there to do any parts; they were just there. We had like ten headphones wired in so that they could listen and be a part of it. Jeff “Chairman” Mao What about working with Jay-Z? DJ Premier Working with Jay? They used to crack a lot of jokes. A lot of the little skits that they had on the Reasonable Doubt album where they’re talking a lot of shit and everything? That’s how they always were in the studio because I didn’t really know his crew too well. I knew him very well because Damon Dash and [Biggie] were from uptown, so we didn’t know each other. I knew Jay-Z from Jaz-O way back in the day. I used to see Jay-Z doing his thing so when he says he was hustling out there doing whatever he did, he paid his dues and was always really into his music. So, they used to really joke around a lot with Pain In Da Ass, y’all know is the little one that talks like he’s Scarface and he’s always like, “OK, I’m reloaded”? He’d be there every day just cracking jokes and they would leave a mic on and just hit record and be like, “OK, just keep talking shit and we’re going to take whatever we can take.” And they did that every day, they would always leave a mic on and set it in the center of the room and just hang it there and start cracking on each other and they would always take the pieces that they liked and put them on the album, all the time, so that was a little different. And Jay-Z was the first artist that I asked him to tighten up some lines on the record we did call “D’Evils” and he was totally against it. We kind of had a little push and pull with each other over that because I felt that as a producer you’ve got to speak your mind to get the best possible take from an artist when you record them. I’m on the other side of the control board listening to what they’re laying down, so if they’re laying music down, they may hear themselves in the headphones while they’re recording, but I’m just sitting their listening with nothing to do but listen. If it feels like you could put a little more energy on the line, I’m going to tell you. Christina was cool like that. You could tell her, “Hey, I think you should…” Well, I mean she would disagree, too, but she’d be like, “Alright, let’s try your option.” She calls them options, your option versus mine and she’ll try it and sometimes she’ll go, “OK, we’ll go with Premier’s,” and sometimes she’ll go, “We’ll go with mine. Aha, mine’s better.” She’ll do that.
And me and Christina got into a little small fight one day. She was in a bad mood and she walked in and goes, “That bassline you put in yesterday, it’s coming out.” Instead of coming in and saying, “Hello” she just walked in and I was like, “Yo, excuse me?” And I pulled her into the backroom and had a few words with her and after that she just punched me in my stomach and she goes, “I hate you,” and she jumped up on me and just hugged me and from then on really we just ended up being the best of friends after that. She’s like a little sister to me, so now we have a really, really good relationship. I went to her wedding… she takes us out everywhere whenever she’s in town. She’s like, “Hey, I’m coming to town, let’s hang out.” She’s really regular, she won’t even bring her security around her because I’m a big guy. Charles, who co-produced the single with me, he’s a really big guy, so she’s like, “Y’all can be my security tonight.” We’ll go to the biggest spot with paparazzi everywhere, she took us to the Golden Globes pre-party and Tom Cruise and all of them are in there. We roll up in our Rolls Royce, I roll out like, “Step aside, step aside,” then it’s all like, “Sorry sir, sorry. Hey, Christina look this way,” and I’m playing the whole role like this is kind of cool. I think I want to be a bouncer now. Actually, I’m a bouncer in the Jazzy Jeff video. Jeff “Chairman” Mao If the producing thing falls through you’ve got another career. DJ Premier Absolutely. I’ll protect you if you need Chairman Mao. I know all these people want to beat you up so… Jeff “Chairman” Mao What about B.I.G, what stories have you got to share with us? DJ Premier Some of the B.I.G stories are a little x-rated. OK, alright, I’ll say it like this: B.I.G, no matter what, he always had some beautiful women around him. Like he’s as black and ugly as ever, but they literally were on him. I had a lounge in the back that actually Showbiz converted into a studio now. Showbiz also rents a room from me, and I went in there to ask B.I.G if he wanted to order anything to eat and when I walk in there one of the girls was up “pleasing” him and he goes, “Yo, Primo, you want some?” And I was like, “Nah, I’m alright. I’m alright, I’m gonna go back in the other room.” But just the fact that… it’s crazy, too, man, because I did this show in Virginia State University with B.I.G when he only had “Party And Bullshit” out. The next day, me and Jeru [the Damaja] performed together because I was DJing for Jeru at the time because he had “Come Clean” out and it was me, Matty C, I remember my lawyer Owen Lamb was out there with us and I remember B.I.G and D-Rock and Lil Caese, we all got some cheap hotel and all our rooms were next to each other. The next morning we’re like wanting to go back to New York so we can get home early and we were like, “All of y’all want to leave?” And they were like, “No, we’ll follow ya’ll.” And B.I.G is butt naked, on the bed, with a big bucket of chicken from KFC sitting between his legs and literally, he’s naked now, and Jeru was really into this whole health thing at the time, and I remember Jeru was like, “Big, you gonna eat all that chicken, man? That’s bad for your health.” He said, “You need to start eating vegetables and stuff.” He goes, “Man, my name is Biggie…” And he was like, “I’m eating this chicken,” and everybody was like, “Yo, could you put some clothes on?” And he was like, “Hell no! This is my room, I’ll be naked all I want to.” I mean, he was butt naked with not a care in the world and I was like, “Wow, look at this big motherfucker.” But that’s how B.I.G was, he was that comfortable in his own skin and, with all the fat hanging and everything, he had no complex about any of that. There were probably about ten of us in his room chilling and blunts going around and naked Biggie, for real. It was crazy. I looked briefly just to go like, “Damn, you’re naked, Big.” But after that, I took a piece of chicken out the bucket. [Applause] Jeff “Chairman” Mao I want to open it up, anybody have any questions at this point? Audience Member [Inaudible] DJ Premier Well, honestly I still apply the same tactics as when I got in the game. I understand how the competition’s changed now because I never thought it would get this bad. I mean, it had been so good for so many years that you just never thought it would get bad, so when it does it kind of scares you for a minute. It’s like, “Man, is this about to be over and just phase out and not be here anymore?” But again, as a consumer, honestly, this is how I do it: for one, I’m a DJ, number one. So, as a DJ I have to have records that I can play besides just the old stuff. I want to still buy new records. So if there’s not a market that’s going to provide that, you’ve got to create a market. And for the fact that I have enough experience from being a DJ and a producer and an artist in Gang Starr, I know now, start your own label. It’s going to be a rough ride if you don’t want to compromise, which I don’t, so forget about the majors, because they’re not going to let me do what I want to do. They’ll let me do what I want to do until I play it for them. Once I play it for them they’ll be like, “No, we need something for the club, we need something for radio.” It’s like, “What did you sign me for? You signed me for what I do already. I’m not going to give you something that doesn’t apply to that.” So creating my own label means that we can drop records any time we want, we can do as many vinyls as we want. Like, I have an artist coming out October 9 called NYGs on my new label Year Round Records and he’s independent and we pressed up our own double-vinyl albums, which was pretty expensive, but it was worth it because I don’t want to take away that aspect. I also made a 12” single and we made CDs, so I know it’s more rough on my pocket, but this is the way it should be so I know down the line it’s going to work. Not only that, but for all the records that we think suck right now in hip-hop on the radio, even the R&B records now, they’re making all these guest appearances for 20, 30 people. If they make 20 records we’ve got to make 40 more than they’re making in order to keep elbowing them out the way so that we can keep up. If we just keep complaining about it, like, “Oh man, stuff is wack.” It’s going to take over unless you come right behind. Like being in a race around the track, if another car is refusing to give up and he’s got a stronger engine that he knows is supposed to be as good as this other car that’s winning all the races, you’ll catch him. But more people got to do it than just me. So, what I’m doing now is expanding and learning how to bring in other producers. I want to MoSS in and help me doing jobs that I can’t, like I get a lot of jobs that I can’t even do with known artists because I’m so over-flooded because I do everything by myself. I know like Dr Dre, now he’s such a big producer now that he has like ten people on his staff that actually create the groundwork of his beats. Of course, he puts his finishing touch on it to make it Dre, but he’s not doing it all by himself anymore. Me? I still want to be a one-man band with my production but there’s a lot of gigs that I know I could pass on to him that he could satisfy them with the type of stuff that he does because I understand his sounds. I want producers on that kind of a level, where he can take some of the jobs. It still represents my company and then we all grow and bring in more people on that level. But, as far as me, to do it all the time I always think like a consumer. Like, would I buy this record if I heard it? And I always know how to step outside of myself and be the person that’s just listening, so every time I do a record I’ll play it ten, 15 times and imagine that I’m another guy that’s just like, “Hey man, check out this new joint Premier did.” And if it really keeps me going after ten or 15 plays – and I’ll just be by myself to ensure that people don’t look at me in the car like, “Yeah, he’s playing his own music all the time, he’s sucking his own dick,” you know? Because you have a lot of artists that think only their stuff is hot and they will play their own stuff every day and sing along with it. I just went to see an artist the other day who actually caught me… I did scratches for Common on a song called “The Game,” and I was walking to Sony studios to let them hear what I did and I see an artist who just released an album just a couple weeks ago, a good friend of mine, but he was like, “Yo, come listen to my album,” and he acted out everything on the album. He was like [mimes dancing] and he was doing the whole thing, it was cool but he was like, “Now check out this record,” and he’s dipping low and grabbing this and I’m just looking at him and I’m kind of like, “Wow.” And the album’s really not that good, so as far as acting it out, he did a good job. I was just kind of like, “Wow.” I’m into my stuff a lot but not like that where I’ve just got to act it out and everything. I think that’s just a little too much but everybody’s different. But I always have a fan/consumer mentality any time I make a record, so that I think about the people that want to spend their money. I think if you do that you’re really cautious of not making the wrong type of product for an audience that you already have had supporting you all these years. The fact that I’ve been supported by the same audience for a long time and it’s grown a lot, the last thing I want to do is really go too far left, where they go, “He ain’t doing it like he used to, I don’t feel what he’s doing now.” So it’s consumer and DJ, because I want records I can play. A lot of these records that are coming now they are good for the club, but then you put on the album, there’s nothing else there. I mean, the Hurricane Chris “A Bay Bay” is a big record, he’s sold a million ringtones. His album’s not selling. But you would think with such a huge record he’s automatically going to be platinum, but they’re having trouble selling the album because the album doesn’t hold the same weight as the single. Now, everybody focuses on singles not the album, and back in the day it was all about the album. I like albums. And I don’t agree with the fact that this whole, with hip-hop, you’re over 30-years-old, you’re too old to do hip-hop, that doesn’t make any sense. Now that means we have adult hip-hop and we got kiddie hip-hop. Little kiddie rap with Bow Wow and those type of records, and then you have adults like us who want another Whodini album, we want another Run DMC album, we want another Stetsasonic album, I want another De La Soul album, a Gang Starr album, so we should still be making them how we make them. We shouldn’t have to start doing it in that style just to stay consistent or relevant. Sell to your market. And I know my market so I make records just for my market. If the kids don’t deal with it, cool. I have a market that supports me, I make it for them and they can invest their money in what they’ve already been happy with and all of that goes in to any record I make. Jeff “Chairman” Mao Is there going to be another Gang Starr record? DJ Premier If Guru wants to do it, I’m down, it’s really up to him. He’s the one that said we should pause for a minute, and if that’s how he feels, fine by me. If he calls me tomorrow and says “I’m ready to start,” I’m ready. But I’ll never say we’re broken up. If I say we’re broken up it’s official. He can say it all day. It ain’t official unless I say it. Audience Member You mentioned that, like a lot of producers, you hear a beat in your head when you go into the studio to work on something. But imagine you go into the studio one day and you’re working with Christina Aguilera and you know this track’s going to be heard a month down the track by every second person on the planet, what do you do if you go in and you just don’t have that beat in your head? Do you say, like, come back tomorrow? How do you deal with that DJ Premier Well, somebody like her, the pressure’s so great because she’s very pushy. She’s like, “Your assignment for the day is add some horn parts to this and make a B section.” I didn’t even know what a B section was and that’s when it changes into a whole different breakdown, a whole different way, and then goes back to the main beat and all that. But now I know. Because even although I understand music theory to a certain extent, because I took piano lessons when I was first/second grade – as a boy you’re like, “Mom, I don’t want to do piano lessons,” but now, going back to it, all that stuff applies to my creativity when I play keyboards and thumb out stuff in the studio. I play all my own little chords now, my own basslines. I’m not excellent with it but it works for what I do. But with her, every day she’s... She told me where to put all scratches, everything. She’s never made a hip-hop record but you could tell she knew how to arrange. I watched her put that whole album together by herself – of course, with all of us as a team – but the whole vision was her and that’s what I respected about it. She sequenced the album, both CDs, the second disc she sequenced it by herself and I was like, “Damn, that means she’s really music.” Everybody’s not just about music because you make records, I call them music people. When somebody’s a person on my level I say, “Oh, you’re a music person,” and that’s just my own definition and not everyone’s a music person. Audience Member Have you ever gone into the studio and the MC or person you are working with has been like, “Oh, I don’t really know what I want, just do something,” and you’ve just had to do it all? DJ Premier With Gang Starr, Guru always gives me every title to the entire album and he’ll put descriptions. Like with “Mass Appeal” he’ll put, “This should be the single, it’s about how radio does this and rappers soften up.” So I was like, “Oh, we should make a funny little elevator-type loop, like elevator music and make fun of it,” which is what we were doing. That’s why we had a little sing-songy little bell-like sample. I was making fun of what music had to sound like in order to get played on the radio but obviously with the lyrics he was saying, “You come with that weak shit I’ll break kids, step into my zone mad rhymes will stifle.” We were disrespecting that style because it was just starting to make its way in. Right about when Puffy was just starting to come through with what he was doing. I respect him as a businessman and he’s made a couple records I like but we still wanted to keep the ruggedness there because that’s what made hip-hop so pure was that it was hard and raw. So, when it comes to Guru, he gives me the entire list, I just look at the list and start making tracks that match the titles and usually I hit it to the right time on the head. Then you have artists that tell me the same old bullshit, “Yo, gimme a ‘Ten Crack Commandments,’ gimme a ‘So Ghetto’ like Jay-Z, gimme one like you did for Nas.” I’m just like, “No, I’m going to give you something that I think goes for you.” Because with any of those artists, with Nas we didn’t have any concept, with “New York State Of Mind” I just envisioned his voice. See, I’m very voice-conscious, too, and his voice sounded like it would sound good over those tracks. And every time I gave it to him he was like, “That’s it, that’s it,” and then he would write. So I’m good either way. Same thing with my scratch hooks, everybody’s getting, “Yo, I want you to do the scratch hooks.” I can’t really do the scratch hooks until I hear what you rhyme about. Sometimes, I’ll have my scratch hooks laid down, like Nas, I already had that down and when he heard it he said, “That’s what the song’s got to be.” I didn’t have the hook, I didn’t have the [sings] that’s all I had, but he was like, “That’s what I’m going to write.” Nas was like cool, but for the most part until I hear what they are going to say, I just make tracks that I think match their vocal tone. And if it’s not a single, I don’t care about the tempo. Some people are like, “Yo, it’s too slow I need something that’s going to be more for the club.” Me and LL Cool J kind of had that little problem with each other in our earlier years working together, and we never did work out because he was like, “I need something for the club,” and I was like, “Well, I’m not the guy you should hire for the club, you should get me for the gutter joint.” And we just talked about it the other day when we did Flex’s car show and he was like, “Yo, this time I’m going to listen to you and let you do what you wanna do and I’m going to rhyme to what you think fits me,” because I know how to give LL tracks. I gave him some bangers but he kept saying, “I need something for the club,” and I was like, “I’m not the guy, call Timbaland or somebody like that.” Jeff “Chairman” Mao We want to get just one or two more questions in. Audience Member You just talked earlier about some of your inspirations and what-not. I know in the early days of Gang Starr you toured with this one group, what I heard, was you getting some inspiration from this Canadian group by the name of Dream Warriors and as well you talk about other music that sucks right now, what does not suck in Primo’s mind? DJ Premier What does not suck as far as that’s currently out? I think Lil’ Wayne stepped it up a whole lot. I’m not crazy about him, but he stepped his rhyme game up a whole lot. He definitely was not hearing his rhyming ability and I repeat little things, little slick things that he says that are kind of clever, so I’m watching him and paying attention to what he’s doing. I know if me and him got into the studio, we’d be able to do something. I love Ludacris, me and him actually did a track together where he gave me the record. I don’t really like it when somebody gives me the record and says, “Yo, hook this up,” because I’m kind of turned off by that. And I told Luda that and it was something that I was already familiar with, it was from the Ramsey Lewis album Sun Goddess and I just didn’t want to use that. I would have felt that all my fans that know I come with very weird leftfield stuff would be like, “Where’d he get that from?” They would be like, “Oh man, this is what he did for Luda.” If me and Luda were going in, I just want to be crazy and bug out, because I already know his level of rhyming ability, so I want to do a Premier beat. It still had my bounce to it, which of course it is going to have, but it wasn’t what I wanted to loop up and he’s like, “This is it,” and I’m like, “But you don’t understand, this is not how I do it.” So, we did the joint but he never tracked it – I still have it, but I’m not proud of it anyway. He still calls me like, “Yo, I really need a track.” So hopefully that’ll happen down the line. I like Luda, I like TI, his albums haven’t really been consistent, but you give him the right tracks he can do what he does lyrically and everything. It’s very small as far as the guys that are standing out, those are the guys that are standing out to me, everything else is really underground, man. I could even work with 50, if I worked with him, his album would have passed Kanye’s if we’d have worked together. Everything else I like is really underground. I was telling [academy participant] Ronald earlier that I wanted to go and pick up the new Sick Jacken vs Muggs album because I know he’s got some good cuts on there. I really keep up with the underground because all the newcomers that are out there for radio from “A Bay Bay,” which is Hurricane Chris and the Soulja Boy record, you’re going to hear that all the time, so you already know the end of that movie before it’s even shown. It’s like I know how this is gonna end. Those careers are a little more limited to me. I actually like Rich Boy to a certain degree. His album, there’s something different about him but not to the level where I’m, like, “Oh man, I can’t wait till his next album drops.” It’s not like that. I don’t anticipate the albums but there’s a small handpicked few that’s really getting radio play right now that have solid albums that I could buy. I like Supafly’s new album, he’s down with Snoop Dogg. People don’t even know it’s out but there’s a new album and Dub C, yeah, yeah, I like Dub C’s new album. That’s a good album. I’ve known Dub, Dub put me onto the whole gangbanging lifestyle back in 1990. My first time going to LA, I was with Masta Ace and we had a show, it was actually ’89, we had a show and this was right when Ice Cube broke up with NWA, we had a show with them and that’s when I met MC Eiht from Compton’s Most Wanted. He had the big jheri curls, he had all black on with two beepers on his hip. I was like, “You got two beepers?”, because I hadn’t seen anyone in New York rocking like that. And that was the first time I saw Suge Knight, and he was working for Eazy-E then, and it was just so crazy seeing the change of how all that Death Row and everything came together, because I was around seeing it then. I remember Dub C went on stage and I just remember Ice Cube came back to just congratulate Dub, like, “Have a good show.” I remember Cube walked out and then a whole swarm of guys jumped Ice Cube and started beating on him but Cube was fighting back, and he got out of there safely and took a couple blows but I got to see it. I was like, “Wow! Seeing NWA going at Ice Cube,” it was crazy. Ren, everybody was there, it was ill. From there, all of a sudden, Cube came out with AmeriKKKa’s Most Wanted. He aired them out and he ended up being the winner at the end of the day. And what you say about Dream Warriors? Audience Member I’d overheard that in your tours together in Europe you appreciated and admired some of the work they had and possibly were inspired as well? DJ Premier They were very, very different. We did a record called “I Lost My Ignorance And Don’t Know Where To Find It,” that was more of a management thing. They used to try and put us together, again that goes back to this trying to make this jazz-rap thing work and I was always like, “It’s not going to work,” because I always wanted this hard beat, bottom line. I wasn’t trying to do anything that was not hard so when it came to mixing with them I was like, “No, this isn’t the right combination,” but I understood what they were doing, and we used to be in Europe a lot so we toured with them and with Michi Mee. And we’d be out in the road doing a lot of European shows, which at that time we were just the shit back then because they were into this quote/unquote jazz craze or whatever, and that’s why we said, “Let’s collaborate on a record and have some fun with it.” And we just found a studio out there and went in and had some fun with it off the edge, just like that. And that’s one of the rare-find records that we’ve got under our stable but they was always cool dudes and we always had a good time with each other hanging and everything. I haven’t seen them in a long time, but I heard they’re going to be performing tonight, right? It’ll be good to see them brothers. Jeff “Chairman” Mao We got time for one last question. Audience Member How was working with Rakim? DJ Premier How was it working with him? Oh, man. With Rakim, you never know when he’s going to show up. Anybody in the industry will tell you he’ll be like, “Yo G, I’m coming down there today, I’ll be right there, you know what I’m saying G?” He’s the same all the time, “Yo, wassup G,” it’s crazy. We talked the other day he was like, “I’m going to be coming to your studio it’s going to be like two in the morning.” And I was like, “Alright,” because that’s usually when I even go in, and he showed up and I gave him two banging beats and he said he’s writing to them. So he said, “Man, I’m not on the shit I was on the last couple of years, I’m on something less ripe, for real. I’m going to show up at least every two weeks and come and see you, we’re going to work, and do it all together.” I’m like, “Alright.” So far he’s been showing up. [Points to someone on the audience] And now he’s back. Boy. Gordon’s back y’all, but this is the guy I used to live with. If it wasn’t for him taking me in, I probably wouldn’t have had a place to stay because my grandfather had already passed and my grandmother, she was actually my step grandmother, she had moved on, so to be taken in and have a place to stay to get my whole career in order. I owe a lot to that man Gordon Franklin right there so you guys give it up for him.

---

Title: Efdemin
Date: 2015-04-20
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/efdemin-dial-b-for-berlin/

Efdemin
Hamburg may not be the most famous techno city in Germany, but it was the birthplace for Dial Records, which continues to delight devotees of the less-is-more school of electronica. Efdemin is a crucial component of the label’s nucleus, whose involvement eventually led him to move to Berlin.
In this lecture at the 2007 Red Bull Music Academy Efdemin explained how he first got involved in making music, how his first track bridged the old to the new and why despite Berlin being so “ugly” he succumbed to its charms.
Hosted by Gerd Janson We have with us a handsome boy from Germany who goes by the name of Efdemin.
Give him a warm welcome. [applause] As you know, I always encourage you to ask questions when they pop up in your
mind and not when the session is finished. So please wait for the other
handsome young man in the corner with the microphone. [applause] He certainly deserved that. Before we have a long talk about what you’re all
about, let’s start with one of your tracks to give people an idea what you
actually do. (music: Efdemin – unknown / applause) Gerd Janson So this was one of the first records you ever did. Efdemin Yeah, that’s true. I think it’s about seven or eight years old now and it’s
the only copy I have left, so it’s a bit scratched. Gerd Janson So the pops are not part of the composition. Efdemin No. Gerd Janson But there’s a bit of a story attached to it, right? Efdemin Yes, you can hear some voices in there. At the time, I was a music journalist
for German music magazines and in this record you can hear some of the interviews I did, even some of the harmonies and rhythms are from these interview recordings. I don’t want to say who it is because it’s sampling,
stealing other people’s voices, but they are all Afro-American artists. At
that time I was very influenced by Theo Parrish and stuff
like that. It was the first period of my production. Everything was very raw
and I was checking out how the computer and sampling thing works. It rumbles
here and there. I haven’t listened to it in a long time now, but it’s nice to
start with this one because it’s my second solo production on the label I
release records on, Dial Records. Gerd Janson Maybe you could talk a bit about what Dial is and who else is part of it? It’s
from Hamburg, Germany, right? Efdemin It was founded in Hamburg in 1999 or 2000, we don’t really remember, by
Lawrence and Carsten Jost, and it was all centred around the Golden Pudel club, which maybe some of you know, a very small arty former punk rock club. They had some of
the first house and techno nights there, so we met there because I was DJing R&B and hip-hop and house. I met another guy who they knew, so they made an offer to this one, said, “If you’re tired of making records yourself and doing all the work around it, you can just give us the tracks.” So we got in contact. That was about seven or eight years ago and we all moved. The only one still staying in Hamburg is Lawrence. Carsten Jost and I moved to Berlin
and Pantha Du Prince was also releasing stuff on the label, and he’s living in Paris. Sometimes it’s not easy to decide what we should do next, but we figure it out somehow. Gerd Janson But it’s still almost like a family style. Efdemin Yeah, very much. It’s not a business thing, there’s no plan behind it of what
it should look like or how many records should come out in one year or who’s next. It’s always just that someone’s got a track or has a concept for an album or an EP and we like it, so it comes out. So it can be almost anything. I did a completely different thing on the label, which we can talk about later, something without beats. We had some indie rock and stuff like that,
very diverse. Gerd Janson And it was also very important how the records actually look, right? So there’s always a lot of emphasis on the artwork too. Efdemin Yes, in the beginning we did it ourselves. I did this one myself [holds record up], it’s just like a copy or something. Now it’s always an artist, a friend of ours, doing the sleeve. For example, my album looks like this. This is very typical Dial stuff, my girlfriend did the sleeve. Gerd Janson That’s a nice way to slip in an advert. Efdemin The back looks very simple. I have another one here [holds up another sleeve]. Gerd Janson There was an exhibition once connected to the Dial label. Efdemin Two years ago in the Netherlands, there was a big show of all the artists involved. Anyone who ever did a cover, there were pieces shown by them. It was a very big show in the end, it’s amazing how many different people came together. Then we had a picture done and there were 30 people on it. Even, if it’s only four musicians or producers doing music for the label, there were so many people around it. It’s not just about music, talking about different plug-ins or whatever. It’s very connected to other parts of life and culture. Gerd Janson But on the other hand, you’re also a bit uneasy about always being put in this art context. Efdemin Sometimes it gets too much, but I’m not uneasy about it. We’re four different people and everyone has a different idea of how it should look, what we should do next, what it should stand for. Sometimes somebody’s taking it more over to his side, but I’m absolutely fine with it. Gerd Janson So you don’t argue much? Efdemin No, we don’t argue much at the moment [laughs]. Gerd Janson But sometimes. Efdemin Sometimes, sure, but that’s a good thing. Gerd Janson And you mentioned Afro-American music. How important is that influence for what you’re doing? Efdemin That’s the main influence, I think. What I do is always related to house, which is Afro-American music. After I was listening to soul, jazz and hip-hop a lot, I listened to a lot of house and techno, which is black music. So that’s the main influence. Gerd Janson You mentioned a record that made you start producing music. Maybe you could tell us about it. Efdemin Yeah, this is the first
Moodymann record I bought. Maybe we can listen to it for a second. It the one where he used the voice of Gil Scott-Heron and it’s called "Amerika.” (music: Moodymann – “Amerika” / applause) Gerd Janson So there’s even a bit of your own blood on that record, right? Efdemin That might be from DJing somewhere, I don’t know what happened. Maybe I was biting my own nails. Gerd Janson So is dance something with a political edge for you? Efdemin This is a good question. Sure it is, because it transports so many things. But it’s always up to where it happens, who listens to, what the goal is. This, for example, very much so, but some contemporary records, which people call minimal techno, are they political? I don’t know, they’re just made for taking drugs, going to the club, staying as long as you can. Maybe that’s political [laughs]. It’s a strange question. Gerd Janson There’s no real answer to it. Efdemin What do you think? Gerd Janson It’s not about me, it’s about what you think. I could talk for days about the politics of dancing. You mentioned taking drugs and minimal techno, so maybe we should talk about Berlin. You moved from Berlin to Hamburg? Efdemin After I moved to Vienna I moved to Berlin, about two-and-a-half years ago. Gerd Janson Before we speak about Vienna, the place where you studied, what is it actually called? Efdemin Computer music. Gerd Janson What’s attractive about Berlin at the moment for a young producer? Efdemin I’m not that young. Berlin is a very ugly city, but everybody moves there now because it’s cheap and has a lot of clubs and a lot of galleries and you can live there very cheaply. It’s the place where most of my friends are because everybody moved there. That’s a very important point. It’s not about the clubs so much, but if you’re doing music you have a good network. You have lots of people you can ask for help in productions, get some gear maybe. It’s a good place for me at the moment, but I think I won’t stay there too long, maybe two or three years and then move somewhere else, but I can’t say where. Gerd Janson So why’s that? Efdemin Because, like I said, it’s a very ugly city. I was shocked when I moved from Vienna, it was so strange moving to this city where all the history is cut out and the culture is very inelegant. You don’t have places with history and tradition, everything is new and contemporary and temporary. That’s very nice
on the one hand, but on the other hand it really gets on your nerves sometimes. Gerd Janson And you’re also part of the club scene there, right, as a DJ. So maybe you could talk a bit about what’s so fascinating about the night life, why everybody wants to be there? Efdemin Yes, it’s very special. The clubs open a very long time, not like here in Toronto where it’s finished at two or three. It goes on for days, if you want. You can go dancing for a week or a month without a break. There’s no closing
hour and there’s always a place where the dance continues, and there’s no problem finding a DJ. On the other hand, it’s kind of unhealthy for some people. There’s this new species now, the unemployed raver in Berlin, getting a small amount of money from the state and spending it in the clubs. Gerd Janson Putting it back into the music [laughs]. How important is that for your role as a producer? Is it just like a circus or a zoo? Efdemin No, no, certainly not. There are very good places where you have really intense moments people really listening to the music and they really know about it. It changed my production a bit, having all these people around and all these opportunities to play and to put out records and get in touch with so many people, I focused more on dance music, because before I was always doing other things. But this last year was mostly producing dance music and
playing a lot. I’ve had a very good two years now, but I still go to Hamburg every two months and play and that’s always the best. Gerd Janson Because that’s where all your friends are? Efdemin No, no, they all moved to Berlin. Hamburg is such a nice city and it’s a very special club, not just people listening to techno or house all the time. Gerd Janson Maybe you could play some of the tracks that are a direct or indirect result of your move to Berlin. Efdemin As a contrast to the first record we listened to, we can play a track called
“Acid Bells,” which was one of the first tracks I did in Berlin. It has
scratches because I used to play it from time to time. Sorry. (music: Efdemin – “Acid Bells” / applause) Gerd Janson So it’s pretty rare to be listening to this record while sitting on a couch. Efdemin Yes, never did it before. Gerd Janson What is it, minimal? Efdemin Yes, I think you can call it minimal. Gerd Janson So you don’t have a problem with that whole term? Efdemin No, I like minimal music and minimal techno very much. It’s always a problem of definition exactly what that means, because this term has been overused these last few years. It means a different kind of music from what I referred to and you, too, I think, which was in the mid-'90s, Cologne, Frankfurt,
Robert Hood. Sonically, I think this refers more to that than the contemporary Ableton Live, we call it horse music: this [imitates minimal techno sound and makes horse-riding motion],
which you can listen to for 100 days and it doesn’t really change. This is something that’s very specific to Berlin. You always have the crowd divided into two parts. One side is more into the history of music and likes house music and wants some warmth and the other is, “We want minimal, please play
minimal.” “Yeah, but I’m playing house music right now.” “We want minimal.” I like minimalistic music very much, I always try to get these two parts together because in the end it’s all one thing. But I think the idea behind house music as a form of contemporary techno is a very different one, the function is very different. House music is very direct and sometimes storytelling and touching and always has this soul reference. Minimal music is very functional, keeping you awake and it doesn’t matter if you play this track after that one or before. Gerd Janson Yeah, but how important would you say are drugs then to this kind of music? Do you think it would have this success without the whole thing, the other thing, attached to it? Efdemin I don't know. It works very well with drugs, but techno always did, and maybe it's important for the scene, but for the music, I don't know. I know a lot of people listening to this kind of music without taking any kind of drugs or alcohol or anything. Gerd Janson There might be some, yeah. Efdemin Yeah. I think it's more how the music is consumed then in the end. And how long you go then. That is the difference. Some people don't really go... It's always been like that I think, but maybe now it's a bit more that people don't go to a club because of listening to the music but more being there and something is going on like the constant beat and then in the end you ask, "How was the DJ? I didn't make it there." "I don't know him," you know, because Carl Craig was playing or something. That's very typical Berlin I think. Gerd Janson That it doesn't matter in the end? Efdemin Yeah, for some, yeah. Gerd Janson What exactly were you doing at Vienna Computer Music? Or what is computer music? Efdemin Computer music is a very freeform kind of study in the [has brief exchange
with interviewer in German] University Of Music And Performing Arts. It’s a very small institute, which was founded in the '50s, coming from the idea of tape music and musique concréte, Pierre Henry. It wasn’t really into the idea of serial music from Cologne, like Stockhausen, but very much into exploring the noise. Over time, computers came in and this institute was the first besides the Ilkom to have this software, which is called Maximus P, which you could see on the screen. That was the first institute teaching this, but now everybody has a laptop and the question is what is the institute for? But only ten people a year go there, exploring their idea of music and noise. But what I did was get into the software [gestures to screen, which shows software] and the idea of graphical programming environment for music and you can do whatever you want with that. I was working on this idea of beatless music, like drone music, and I produced it all with this software and did some installations for specific sides and in the end I put out this CD, which is like an overview of this time. Maybe we can listen to a piece but there’s really nothing going on. But I think this institute is going to be shut down very soon because they don’t like it anymore, the University Of Music doesn’t like these computer music guys. Gerd Janson Why? Efdemin Because it’s always too loud. They do two concerts a year in this big concert
hall there and it’s always too loud for them. Gerd Janson Just because it’s too loud? Efdemin They have this very conservative idea of playing the viola and we shouldn’t
use any computers or something. Gerd Janson Do you have any classical music education? Efdemin Yes, I played the cello for a time but I quit. I’m very sorry about that. If I could choose now, I think I would still play cello and be part of an orchestra. Gerd Janson Can’t you just pick it up again? Efdemin No. I still have the cello and play from time to time. Parts of this are made with the cello, but only as a sound, something I use for sampling. Which one should we listen to? This one. (music: Efdemin - unknown) [That’s] an example of what I was doing during my time in Vienna. At the same time I was working on this sequencer, which is programmed in this
Maximus P thing. Gerd Janson So you programmed it yourself, right? Efdemin Yes, that’s an older version of it because I didn’t use it for a long time
because my friend and colleague Oliver Kargl, who as a DJ calls himself RNDM, we
have a project called Pigon), which is based on this software. We met in Vienna and I showed him this thing and he
was completely freaking out about it, he loved it. Since then he’s always playing with it and asking me if I can please add a new envelope or whatever. He has the new version of it. I just brought it with me so you could see it.
We did tons of recordings with it because you can only record, you can’t save anything and then reopen it. You really have to do it instantly and then, if you like it, record it. Gerd Janson But there’s no way to recreate afterwards? Efdemin No, that’s the idea. Every time you open it you start from scratch, so you don’t have your special rhythm that you always use, you can’t use any midi. It’s only a small sample library but we can change that. Even playing live with it sometimes it was fantastic, sometimes it was absolutely super-shit. You never know what’s going to happen, it’s really up to you whether or not you have a good day. But this is the first record we did with this program. Maybe we can listen to it for a second. (music: Pigon - “Auf Und Ab” / applause) If you want to listen to another record we did which wasn’t done with this software, but done with Cubase and sounds completely different, very different music.
Shall we? Gerd Janson Yes. Efdemin The software and instruments you use for production have a very big influence on the music. This is a good example of that. Gerd Janson Couldn’t you just have used Ableton for this thing we just heard? Efdemin Sure, but it would’ve sounded completely different. This one has a compressor
on the inside, which is always on the master. If we’d used Ableton we would’ve reopened it several times and changed it until it was perfect maybe. Gerd Janson So the idea was to make some sort of live take. Efdemin Yes, exactly. This could be done with Ableton too. [starts and stops music] Sorry, that’s the wrong side. (music: Pigon – unknown / applause) So you don’t like your tracks short? Efdemin No, I don’t, it’s always a bit longer. Gerd Janson Is it made that way with the DJ in mind or is just the way you approach it? Efdemin It wasn’t made that way, but now, since I DJ more I changed a bit, I think. But I actually don’t like that because I like it when tracks contain three tracks and develop and are completely different at the end to when they start. Something I think is really fascinating, if you’re listening to old tracks by Theo Parrish, it’s always three or four tracks in one. Sometimes it sounds like they’re reversed, so what would normally be the first theme is at the end. It’s very strange and you have very big developments. If you play them, you really have to play the whole track otherwise they don’t work at all. Gerd Janson Is that something that influenced you a lot? Efdemin I think so, because I was listening to it a lot. But you can’t compare us,
because he is up there somewhere [points upwards]. Gerd Janson Maybe you could explain the sequencer to us a little bit. Efdemin This one? It’s very stupid, it’s simple. Gerd Janson Shall we change seats. Efdemin It wasn’t my plan to talk about that too much. Gerd Janson But I talked you into it. Efdemin Like I said, it’s super-simple. [demonstrates on the screen in the auditorium] This is really an old version: you have two parts. Do you see the mouse? [audience replies ‘yes’] This left part is a very simple 16 step, the
sequencer in this version is, I think, either seven or eight, where you can load samples and if you load them into the buffer you can choose one and it shows it up here. Then you can decide how long you want to play it. Then you have an envelope here going over it and here you decide how the rhythm should
be. It’s a very simple drum machine because you miss all the functions of a good one, like shuffle or longer steps. You can’t do 32 steps, for example. But then you can record small loops and load them into this right side thing and play loops from that. This section is very old, it was meant for singing.
I was recording my voice, but then I didn’t like my voice and didn’t use it anymore. But you can play any instruments in there, then I made some delays down there. You can load some VST plug-in there and this is the very cool
compressor because it makes the special sound, because it’s very heavy and what comes out in the end is always a bit rectangular, I think. Gerd Janson How long did it take you to create that thing? Efdemin How long? I can’t really say because it was a work in progress. I started it four years ago and haven’t done anything on it in the last year. The main work was maybe about a month, sitting and playing. It’s always the main work, sitting and playing it, because you play, then you realise, ‘Other programmes
have this function, how does that one work?’ It’s made of several things, I can open one of these. This is what is behind, it looks like a
Reaktor or something. This is always changing, every time I open it I think, "Ah, something is wrong and it must be corrected." Then I change it and something gets affected by that and it
doesn’t work anymore. If I have the time, I will continue with it because I plan to finish it and do a version everybody can use. It’s a bit like Fruity Loops or something, it’s very simple, it restricts you, you can’t do
everything. I think it’s like the opposite of Ableton Live, where you can really do everything so quickly and you don’t really have to… For me, Ableton Live is a very cool program but it’s too much for me because you can do everything in a second. Then I can’t decide what I want. Gerd Janson So you like to be restricted? Efdemin Very much, yes. I’ve started to buy drum machines now and outboard effects and
it’s really cool. You can concentrate on one beat, which is really good,
rather than having everything at one time. Gerd Janson So how do you think this world of endless possibilities has changed the current music? You said it’s quite important, the stuff you use effects the result you get. Efdemin I decided to use Cubase most of the time for my music, because I’ve known it for so many years and you can do a lot of things. But it’s also a bit more work than Ableton Live. You can’t just stretch everything and have it all fit and it’s always the right tune, mouse bounce and that’s it. I think maybe the whole development of the music is very interesting because there have never been so many records coming out as there are now, so many different labels and artists. It’s dangerous at the moment because the distributors are slowly
dying because there’s too much music coming out and with the MP3 distribution it’s changing. Maybe it will develop into two different markets: one for vinyl and one for all the other functional music. The music you keep for one week then throw away because you can’t play certain tracks anymore. So maybe it
will be two markets. I always try to do music that is lasting, not just for one special moment or some hyper mode. I want something I can listen to in five years. It’s funny, listening to that old record I was thinking it’s not that well-produced, but it’s still the same music as I do now. Gerd Janson But isn’t the feeling more important than the way it sounds? Efdemin Absolutely. Software is just a tool to express what you want and you have to put your soul into that software. With this thing it’s really hard to get something soulful out there. Gerd Janson Maybe you could just demonstrate it, just the basics. Efdemin I don’t know if it works because it’s the wrong soundcard. [music starts] This is just a silly loop, I just did in two seconds. Like I said, it’s Fruity Loops in the end. I can’t play around with it so much right now because it’s the wrong soundcard and this interrupts it. I didn’t bring it with me. Gerd Janson But this is some sort of soul then, the mistakes? Efdemin It doesn’t sound good, it’s all [makes horrible noise], I’m sorry. Gerd Janson You talked about the way distribution dies out or changes and two markets. But do you think the effort of making a piece of vinyl and doing the cutting and the mastering and maybe re-doing it because something goes wrong. Would this still make sense if you’re only selling 500 copies from your perspective, as
someone involved in a label? Efdemin We don’t sell so many records, 500 is not a bad number [laughs]. It’s not
about making money with records. That is an important thing for Dial Records, too. It was never about making money, having a masterplan and making number one hits. If it’s selling, well, then it’s… Gerd Janson By accident? Efdemin Yes, by accident. Some people only sell 100 records and put a lot of soul in
there. That’s OK. But what’s so different between mp3 and vinyl? This piece of music [holds up record], if it’s not burned or thrown away, it will be there in 100 years. I have so many old records from the ’20s. The time really writes itself in there. Every time you play it you have scratches. Sometimes you can’t play a record. I have records where I know that there is a scratch in the beginning, and I can only play it from that point on. There’s history in there, and I remember where I made the scatch. Mp3s will be gone when the computer operating systems are different or you have a different file system. All of that will be gone. I think this continues. I like how they smell. Gerd Janson And how they taste? Efdemin The taste of vinyl is very good. It’s very poisonous, by the way, but this one you can see has been used a lot. Gerd Janson This is a record by Photek. Efdemin Yes, it’s Photek. I brought it with me because there’s a housey track on there
we could maybe listen to. Gerd Janson Is everyone familiar with Photek? Efdemin You said there was somebody doing a drum & bass lecture tomorrow. Gerd Janson I think tomorrow morning,
Makoto, right? Efdemin I don’t know which one it is, we’ll have to check it out. (music: Photek - “T'Raenon (Version)”) This is Photek and it’s from ’96 and it’s called… Can you read it? Gerd Janson I would say “Return,” but it’s not “Return.” Something like that [shows sleeve to participant]. It was always hard to read the labels on drum & bass records. “T-Raenon” by Photek. Did you just buy it because of that house track? Efdemin If I go to Hardwax. Gerd Janson Which is a record store in Berlin. Efdemin Yes, a very good one, they specialise in dub. They were the first ones in Berlin to stock this dubstep thing. Sometimes I buy it, but if I play it it’s always, “Oh, he’s playing the same as Ricardo does.” Gerd Janson Who’s Ricardo? Efdemin Ricardo Villalobos, he’s the one who played it in techno for the first time. Gerd Janson He introduced dubstep to techno, you’d say that? Efdemin Yes, I’d say that. But I think it’s very interesting music, I like it's a strange
tempo, always a bit too fast or too slow. I never know which tempo it is because it sounds good on both, which is very interesting because house records usually only sound good on one tempo. But, for example, Photek records you can always listen to on 33 too. Gerd Janson Any questions? Audience Member [inaudible] Efdemin Maybe both, save time. She put it on the Panorama mix CD, but I don't know if she was the first one to play it. Gerd Janson Maybe Ricardo slipped it into her record bag. Efdemin Who knows. Audience Member You said the MP3 file format will be dead in a few years. Could you explain? Efdemin Maybe, I don't know. I don't hope so, but maybe it's a different format then, and... Then you can't read MP3 anymore, so you have to re-buy it like when you had tracks on CD. In 10 years, will we have a CD player? I don't think so. Maybe in 10 years or 20 years, you can't read an MP3 anymore because it's way too big for your computer or something. I don't know they'll have different formats for that. I think it's a very... As I, as everybody who works with computers knows that you lose data all the time. I think it's the same problem with MP3 because somehow your hard disk dies or you buy a new computer and you forget to transfer it or something. It's a very clever idea and I like it very much, but it's very different if you think of it as something to save the music for the future. Gerd Janson Eternity. Audience Member Some of the music you played was pretty ravey, especially that [inaudible] dance one. Where did you get your rave party experience? Did you go to France or something? Efdemin No, I started going to clubs very late, and my most intense rave experience was Richie Hawtin playing in Hamburg in, I don't know, '97 or something. It was a time with his 808 and 909 and decks things... Gerd Janson It's like a mix CD or something? Efdemin That was a mix CD, but he was performing live with drum machines and records and it was very minimal and very hard at that time. Gerd Janson Of course it was minimal. Efdemin Yeah, but I loved it totally and that time I got really absorbed into this harder thing and started to explore like Jeff Mills and all that stuff. I didn't want to... I didn't go to clubs so much when I was 20 or something. I was always a bit afraid of that, and I was more into punk rock and stuff like that I think. Now, I go to clubs more and more, that's a bit strange. Audience Member What clubs in Berlin? Efdemin Which clubs? Yeah, I don't know... Gerd Janson Anymore questions? You made yourself clear then. So before we go to lunch, a last record? Efdemin Yes. I don’t know the name, actually. I like this one so much. Something about records, when I play them in a club I just look for the blue one, I don’t look for the name. Gerd Janson So you never DJed with a laptop? Efdemin I did, but it’s very different. I don’t like it so much. This is a Theo Parrish record and I’m going to play the dub side. Gerd Janson And it’s called “Dance Of The Drunken Drums.” Efdemin Thank you. (music: Theo Parrish – ”Dance of the Drunken Drums”) Gerd Janson Sounds almost like a weirdo trying to do a dubstep record. Please big up the
man called Efdemin.

---

Title: Carl Craig
Date: 2015-04-21
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/carl-craig-planet-evolution/

Carl Craig
In the future, when history books will include a chapter on the history of Detroit techno, one of the names people will come across is Carl Craig. A young Craig started out as Derrick May’s chief assistant at Transmat Records in Detroit and London. In 1989, Craig released “Elements,” a debut single as Psyche on Transmat, which quickly lead to his name being attached to what became known as the second wave of Detroit techno artists. In the ’90s Craig released house, techno and electronic jazz under different monikers – 69, Innerzone Orchestra and Paperclip People – and on various labels – KMS, Open, Mo’Wax, Retroactive. In the early ’00s he co-created the Detroit Electronic Music Festival, serving as its artistic director for the first two years before returning to it in the early ’10s.
In this lecture at the 2007 Red Bull Music Academy, the techno pioneer revisited the evolution of the city’s most famous musical invention and his approach to remixing and production.
Hosted by Torsten Schmidt We’re very fortunate to welcome Mr. Carl Craig all the way from Detroit, so please make him feel very welcome. [applause] How was the drive up here? Carl Craig Hard, very difficult. Torsten Schmidt What was so difficult about it? Carl Craig Seeing that I have a horse and carriage, it’s like the pioneering days. No. No, no. It was easy except for the rain and the traffic and all that kind of stuff. Detroit is a car city but we have no traffic. I don’t know what Toronto’s known for but you guys have too much traffic. What are you going to do? Torsten Schmidt Wow, six weeks into it and finally we get some proper feedback, that’s nice too. Interesting. Is there any sort of relation between the two cities at all or are they just relatively close to each other for North American standards? Carl Craig It’s kind of difficult to say, I mean, for us in Detroit and Toronto, Toronto was always this exotic place to come to, to come for the festivals in summertime and to try to pick up the girls in the summer as well. I think musically Toronto had more to do with New York and house music. With techno and electronic music, the closest to Detroit has been London and Windsor and that’s with what Richie Hawtin and John Acquaviva were doing, so I don’t think that the cities have been as close as what they could’ve and should have been. Torsten Schmidt What do you mean with “should have been”? Carl Craig Since they’re so close in distance... Torsten Schmidt It’s kind of weird when, at least for Europeans, I guess, when you take to proximity that’s like what, three or four hours? Carl Craig Right, yes. Torsten Schmidt Which is quite a lot, and then if you look at the state of Ontario you’re just not even getting, I don’t know, a tenth of it covered in four hours, and that’s one of the smallest states in the country in the first place. What’s it like living... What’s it like for... Carl Craig I think I’m cut off anyway. Torsten Schmidt Yeah. Audience No, we can hear you. Torsten Schmidt Yeah. How do you work with that hearing then? You got one of those fancy ear plugs? Carl Craig Stick my fingers in my ears and keep on going. Torsten Schmidt How old school. If we were to take a ride down there, what would be the difference as far as city layout goes and different mentalities probably? Carl Craig City layout. Detroit’s kind of a big city, but we don’t have anything. Not a lot of buildings. We have less than a million people that live there, in comparison to here, where it’s a newer city and the sign said 2.5 million people, so that’s quite a huge difference. I think also Toronto’s maybe a bit more cosmopolitan in ideas and thoughts to what happens artistically and what’s accepted and the boundaries you can really take, where Detroit is a very small-town mentality, and I think that’s what helped us to make the music we have over the years, because we were fighting against a lot of the small-minded mentality that came from the people sometimes. In Detroit it’s like “What do you do?” Well, I make music. “What are you, a singer?” No. “What do you do?” I produce. “Oh you produce, like Motown.” No, not like Motown. “Oh, well what do you do?” I make electronic music. “That techno? You make techno?!” Yeah, OK, another one of these motherfuckers, OK. So, that’s just... Detroit is a great place, I lived there all my life. But at the same time, in your hometown you have to fight a bit more maybe. Torsten Schmidt Nevertheless, that mentality seemed to foster a lot more talent than, let’s say, the relative easiness of... this place, for example. Carl Craig Right. It might be because all we have is music. Cars and music, you know. Torsten Schmidt And the cars are gone now too, right? Carl Craig But everybody drives big cars still. We’re trying to floss and pimp ourselves, and all that kind of stuff, so the mentality is still there, but that’s inevitably what it is, is cars and music. That’s what Detroit’s about. Torsten Schmidt So your outlook has been slightly different than, let’s say, that of the average blue-collar car worker, right? How did it come about regarding upbringing, education, influences... Carl Craig Say that again? I’m sorry. Torsten Schmidt What made you actually venture into the field of music instead of following the path that might be slightly more traditional around there. Carl Craig That’s difficult to say. Maybe it’s music from the radio that really inspired me to make records. We had a radio disc jockey in Detroit named the Electrifying Mojo, and he had so much influence in the city musically, and the music that I was intrigued by the most was all this weird stuff that he was playing. I was learning how to play guitar and all that kind of stuff, so once I actually got to touch a keyboard and to play little melodies like Harold Faltermeyer — “Axel F,” or Kraftwerk’s stuff or whatever it was on the little keyboard. That gave me to bug and I just have to follow my instinct. We also had Jeff Mills on the radio as the Wizard and Derrick May had a radio show, and Derrick’s really the guy who turned my head around musically. Torsten Schmidt Now, we want to wrap this up rather quickly because we actually want to go right into the nitty-gritty of remixing, which I guess is one of your main professions these days. Probably to give those an idea who might not be all too familiar with your work, can you take us through the... God knows what, fifteen different aliases? Like how many are there? Carl Craig I can’t even remember, I’m sorry. Torsten Schmidt What’s Carl Craig doing in the first place, like if you put a Carl Craig moniker on a record? Carl Craig A Carl Craig record consists of ideas that are melodic and drum-driven electronic music that is really influenced by rural music, by Eno, by hip-hop, by everything to listen to. But maybe more of a subdued context, in comparison to something like 69, which is just the craziest shit that you could think of to throw down there. Maybe a bit more influenced by Public Enemy, or Paperclip People that’s straight disco, just loopy craziness or Très Demented that’s supposed to be demented. Everything has a purpose, so I don’t make tracks and then say “I’m gonna be a different guy today.” It all sounds kind of different to me. When I make Carl Craig stuff, it’s only after I’ve made the material that it becomes Carl Craig material that it sounds as though it’s supposed to be Carl Craig. When I did the “Demented Drums” and that stuff, those Tres Demented, it had to have something new because it really didn’t fit into anything I had done before. Torsten Schmidt What’s the difference to working in a more a group sort of environment when you take the Innerzone Orchestra or the Detroit Experiment? Carl Craig Hmm. Well, with Innerzone it was a one man band that I felt needed to be expanded to three people or five people or whatever the instrumentation was. With Detroit Experiment or with this Tribe album that we’re doing now with Marcus Belgrave and Wendell Harrison and Phil Ranelin, that is a group mentality that is just produced by me. The idea is starting off as a group doing songs in comparison to one person doing a track, going freestyle, and then saying, “You know what, maybe I should add some real drumms in here, maybe I should get an upright bass, maybe I should get a pianist involved in it.” Torsten Schmidt What’s the difference in the workflow when you speak of tracks in comparison to songs? Carl Craig For me, keeping the integrity of the song is necessary if that’s what the final idea is. I’m more of a track kind of cat anyway so I like making rhythm, making a groove, and then maybe adding some changes into it later. When I take a remix or something, if it’s a song and it needs to stay a song, then I try to keep it as much of a song as possible. One example is “Kilode” by Tony Allen I did recently, and I tried to keep it as much Tony Allen as possible and as much of a song as possible. It being a track and a groove and builds up as a track, but still stays a song in some cases. (music: Tony Allen — “Kilode (Carl Craig Remix)”) [new topic] ...and you listen to the track constantly and constantly. The only structure is the structure that you’re building as you’re mixing, because I don’t really arrange things to come in at certain places in Logic or on Radar or whatever I use. I just kind of use the mixing console almost as an instrument. Torsten Schmidt Old school, hands-on? Carl Craig Old school, hands-on, yeah. I try to make it a little easier by placing things where I can touch a little better, but sometimes. I was just working on a mix the other day, and I had the MPC running Logic, and the MPCs over there, and the mixing consoles over here. I’m changing sequences and running and trying to pull instruments out and in and stuff, so it makes it a little more difficult, but I like that kind of thing. It’s quirky. Instead of sitting there in front of a computer saying “OK, well, I run it to be there,” and then playing it over again, “No, that doesn’t sound right there.” It’s maybe a little too cerebral, in comparison to it being maybe just a spirit thing. That is a perfect example of me putting my spirit into the music and it becoming what it becomes, and I mix it as it is. [applause] This is the Tribe stuff, the jazz side of things. Marcus Belgrave and Wendell Harrison and Phil Ranelin. Karriem Riggins, who’s a great drummer and plays with Kanye and Common and all those guys. Check it out. (music: Tribe — unknown / applause) That was some legendary Detroit musicians. Marcus Belgrave, Wendell Harrison, Phil Ranelin. It was all these guys in the room and playing and doing their things, and it was great. So this kind of shows the scope of what I do musically, where I do things on my own, which might be a little more trance-y or crazy or whatever it might be. Or with other artists as a producer and mixer, or as a re-mixer by taking the material that’s given to me and then I just kind of manipulate it and play around with it and make some new things or some old things or whatever the case might be. Torsten Schmidt So, I guess the remixing is more the bread and butter of things, because it’s relative. Unless you need eight, nine months to get your head around the Tony Allen track, it’s, I don’t know, I guess some Junior Boys track wouldn’t take that long. Carl Craig The Junior Boys one took a little less time, but because I listen to things as an artist, I think of things as an artist as well, so it’s not like “OK, well, shoot, can I do twenty remixes this month and get paid bookoo dollars, go out and buy me a Rolls Royce,” or some shit like that. It’s not as easy as that and I don’t have a team of people that are working with me. It’s mainly me, and I have an engineer that works with me and I’ll tell him to pull it up and then he might sit there in the studio for five days twiddling his thumbs until I come in and actually do something with it. Torsten Schmidt How does it work other than if you were doing it for demonstration purposes? How many offers do you turn down? Carl Craig I turn down a lot actually. I like doing mixes for people that I know, because it more fun to do it. Then there’s the mixes for money, and those aren’t necessarily the most fun to do because sometimes you might have to try to fix something you don’t like in the beginning. I don’t try to take mixes that I don’t like from the beginning. If I don’t like the song then I can’t do anything with it. With the Junior Boys thing, I really liked the song, so I could fit my thing into what they do. The Tony Allen thing, like I told you, we love that record, so... Torsten Schmidt Theo [Parrish]’s “Falling Up”? Carl Craig Theo’s record, yep. Theo’s record was another one that took me a while to really get to it. I think I was being a bit precious about his music because I’ve known Theo for a long time. I was asked by Third Ear to do it, and I hadn’t talked to Theo for a little while. It was just a situation where I took my time and really listened to it and listened to what he did, and even with that song, what I did in order to try and make it better, ’cause I think what he did was genius, was not to sample him and play the samples. It was actually to sit down there, figure out what he did, and then replayed it. Like the sample that he’s using as a chorus, I had to figure out what that chord was. Then I played it in Logic, sampled it into NP and replayed it. That taught me a lot of lessons of how to take something and almost keep it the same, but it’s becoming me at the same time. When I do a remix, the idea of doing a mix isn’t that I’m doing a mix and then “OK, here you go, that’s your record. That’s your thing.” It’s the concept that that’s my record too. It’s almost like we’re collaborating. I try not to let something out of my studio unless I’m really happy with what it is. If I think it sucks, then I’ll tell them I don’t want to put it out, or whatever the case is. Torsten Schmidt Also, there’s a certain sense of trademark that you have to defend I guess, ’cause, to quote a British radio journalist who might be amongst us somewhere in the building, “Yeah, he does those records that save my ass when I have to play places like Sonar.” Carl Craig [laughs] OK, well, that’s good. Torsten Schmidt There’s a certain type of quality that you can get. Usually those remixes say exactly what it says on the tin. You get some sort of a big, momentum, peak time, ten-minute buildup monster-ish kind of thing. Carl Craig Some of them work that way and some of them don’t. Can’t make a ten-minute monster all the time. [laughs] Torsten Schmidt That’s the other thing. When you realize you’re just not getting there, but somehow you got deadlines and people are just like “Come on, we need it, we’re too late for the pressing thing,” and you’re just like “Yeah, it’s alright but not all right.” Carl Craig Yeah, a lot of people have missed a lot of deadlines. With Wajeed’s mix of Tony Allen, I think my mix was supposed to come out before his did, but I couldn’t do it, so he got his done and his came out. Luckily I know Mark, who owns the label, so it made it really simple. The cash transaction didn’t happen until after I finished the mix. I’ve known him for a long time, but if somebody’s going to pay me money up front, then the pressure’s on. If you’re hired by Japanese, for instance, they hate not being on deadline. Germans too, by that fact. Carl Craig Yes dear. Audience Member Is there any reverent track that you would love to remix, but wouldn’t dare touch? Carl Craig My problem is when I pick a track to remix, I always screw it up somehow, so it’s better that somebody pick a track for me to do because I don’t have that love for it. For instance, if I wanted to remix “Tour de France,” I’d completely destroy it. It would just not work. “One Nation Under a Groove” just would not work. You know the songs as the songs. I’d rather deconstruct something that I don’t have as much feeling for. Audience Member I bought your Tommy Allen remix. Carl Craig Oh great. Audience Member It’s good. Carl Craig Thank you. Audience Member I want to ask you if you want to remix somebody’s track, you approach them and they give you all the elements of the software to you? Carl Craig If I approach somebody concerning the track, yeah. It can come in various ways. In the old days they send DAT with the elements in stereo basically. Or maybe one side, like drums, and the other side might be bass or something. Whatever the situation is. It can come in Pro Tools form. It can come as Logic format. It can come as tape. It can come as anything. However it comes, it’s my job to go in and figure out what’s on it and get my head around it and put it into any form that makes it possible for me to feel comfortable with. For instance, when we took this track it was done in Logic, but I knew that doing it in Ableton would be better for me to do something a little quicker to just mess around with the ideas a little bit more. Audience Member I quite like the underground music and I found that a lot of classic tunes are really fabulous after remakes to different kinds of styles. For us we are fresh. We are young, just starting to produce and we really want to sample something from a track we like. Any ways to take the a cappella or the special part of the tunes very precisely so we can use it. Do you not suggest we do it like that? Carl Craig It’s art. It’s guerrilla warfare. You do what you’ve got to do in order to get that inspiration out there. On a business side of things, I would say if you sample somebody, try to recreate it. Sometimes that sample is just it. When you look at somebody like Puffy or Kanye or any of those guys that use samples in their shit, it’s a business decision for them to keep it in there. You’ve got to pay in order to get a bigger hit. If you’ve got a record that you think is going to sell 50 million copies or some shit like that, then you’ve got to pay to keep it in there. But in other cases you have to realize that maybe you won’t get permission to use it, so you have to go back to the drawing board and either scrap it or play it over again. Many a times you can clear the publishing, but you can’t clear the sound recording. If you recreate it you clear publishing a lot easier. Audience Member What software would you use for that? Carl Craig Fuck the software. Just use whatever you can to do it. Audience Member Just EQ it. Record it again to wave form. Carl Craig Whatever technique it takes. Sometimes the crappiest samples sound the best. Sometimes the best samples don’t have any feel to them. I’m an advocate for you getting the creativity out there, but I’m not an advocate for you to just rip off somebody, you know what I’m saying? Since we’re on tape, I’m not advocating ripping off motherfuckers. Audience Member Thanks. Carl Craig No problem. Audience Member I’d like to know do you have any new aliases or new sounds, as you described it earlier, coming out? Carl Craig Not as of right now. The Tribe thing is what I’ve produced recently, so the more jazz stuff. As far as other aliases, we’ll see what happens. Audience Member We’re satisfied as it is as well. Carl Craig Thank you. Thank you. When I get to be about 60 or 70 I’ll try something else. Yes sir. Audience Member Some people think that remixing is your way of improving a track. What’s your take on that? Carl Craig Sometimes. Sometimes it’s that way. Like I said earlier, sometimes a track is perfect. You just can’t touch it. There’s a few ways that you can look at taking a job as a remix. You can take it as a job or you can take it as an experiment or you can take it as a mission. You could do any of that kind of stuff. Sometimes it’s all three for me, one of each, whatever the situation is. Many a times, when I do take a mix, I take it in order to experiment more than anything; to find out how somebody might have produced that track. If it’s a commercial track, it’s like, “How’d they get it to sound like that?” I remember I did a mix for Inner City for a track called “That Man (He’s All Mine)” and the engineer was a man named Goh Hotoda, I think his name is. He engineered for Talate as well. This is the only time I ever came across a track that was on multitrack that when you put everything to zero, it was the record. There was nothing else that you had to do with it — when every level was at zero, the record was there. Maybe a little compression on the mix or something, but the record was there. It sounded perfect. From hearing that it made me realize a lot of things like the techniques that Quincy Jones and Bruce Swedien had used to do a lot of Michael Jackson’s stuff and George Benson things and the Brothers Johnson and all these records I grew up with that I love that sounded amazing and the techniques that they would go to find ways of making those records sound new and interesting and next step and all that. Of course it was the composition and the arrangement and all of these things that come involved in it, but a lot of it really has to do with how they capture that sound to take and how it’s presented afterwards and how much you really have to do to it in order to make it a record and not make it a record. When I took a mix from Yello, the power of the sound is what came through, which I wasn’t able to achieve at the time, so I learned from doing that. The presence of the vocals that were done on Tori Amos’s stuff and how they separated the piano from vocals with their playing at the same time and doing all these things. It was a lot of research for me over the years and I still look at it that way. If you gave me a track that I liked and I heard it on tape or I heard it on a CD or something, I’d say, “Damn that sounds fucking great. I wonder how did he do that.” I can add something to it, but let me really see what he was doing to this. Sometimes it might just be that you finalize the shit crazy and it sounds great, or it could be that you actually are a great engineer and there’s something that I don’t know that I want to discover how to do it. Every day. Old dogs can’t learn new tricks — fuck that. That’s out the window. Every day is a new adventure. Every day is a new experience. Every day is a lesson and you’ve just got to keep your eyes and your ears open constantly and always try to get to that next level. Audience Member What was the hardest remix you ever had to do? What was the hardest situation that you ended up completing? Carl Craig That I completed? Fuck. My hardest remix. No, but that’s an interesting question. I can’t think of what it... As I said earlier, if it’s something that I really loved, like the Tony Allen album. The whole album. It made it so much more difficult for me to do a remix of the track. Elements that were involved wasn’t just that Tony is a great drummer and he had some great people playing and some great ideas. It was that my friend Moritz von Oswald did the mix on it and the mix sounds fucking amazing. The whole album sounds great. That, I think, was one of the hardest ones for me to do and it just had more to do with the fact that there was a high bar set and I had to achieve it. I had to come close to it, if not better. Torsten Schmidt Over there we have the very last question for 2007’s Academy. They’re in Manchester. Audience Member I already took the mic. Torsten Schmidt Oh. Second to last. Audience Member I just wanted to finish off. I guess you get this question a lot, but I never figured out the truth about the sandwich. Carl Craig It’s true. Audience Member It’s true. OK. Thanks a lot. Audience Member Thanks for coming down. I really appreciate it. Carl Craig Yeah. Audience Member Just a quick question, really. How do you feel about being remixed, like the basic reshape, for instance? How do you feel about that? Carl Craig Love it. Audience Member You love it. Carl Craig Yeah. Yeah. What they did to “Climax,” what they did to that. Of course being an artist it’s more difficult to… Being an artist that remixes, it’s sometimes more difficult to appreciate what someone can do to a mix, but those I thought were great. We’re going through a series of remixes now called Elevate for Kevin Saunderson and I’m hearing all these remixes that people are doing. Loco Dice did a mix and Joris Voorn and SLS, I think their mixes are coming up now. These are songs that I’ve lived with, that inspired me; “Bassline” and that kind of stuff, that really blew my mind. It’s almost like I’m the artist being remixed in that situation and it’s really quite interesting to hear what people’s ideas are and how they use the tracks and whether they deconstruct the track or if they use any of the elements from the original or what they use. It’s quite amazing. Audience Member Do you know what Basic Channel did with your record? Carl Craig I don’t know. Stepped on it. Whatever they had to do. What Mark and Moritz had done and what they do is they definitely make it into a Basic Channel song. With something like “The Climax,” it was very little of the “Climax’s there, but I love what they do so it made it fantastic. Audience Member Great. Thank you. Carl Craig Thank you. All right. Are we done now? Torsten Schmidt It’s an honor to say thank you very much. [applause]

---

Title: Clare and Brent Fischer
Date: 2015-04-21
URL: http://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/clare-and-brent-fischer-keep-it-in-the-family

Clare and Brent Fischer
Clare Fischer may not be a household name, but to the cognoscenti it rings loud and true. He began his career in LA in the late ’50s as a keyboardist, composer, bandleader and arranger and has worked with everyone from Dizzy Gillespie to Prince and Celine Dion. In this freewheeling session at the 2005 Red Bull Music Academy, he and his son Brent explain all about arranging and reveal why you should never listen to producers or record labels.
Hosted by Monk One Welcome. I hope you all enjoyed yourselves last night with the great music that we heard at McCaw Hall, and I hope you didn’t enjoy yourselves too much afterwards. It’s my great, great pleasure and honour to introduce Dr Clare Fischer [applause] and Mr Brent Fischer [applause]. Clare Fischer I haven’t got used to the term ‘Dr’ yet. That was an honorary degree given to me by my alma mater, Michigan State University. The only time I call myself ‘Dr’ is when I go to a restaurant and I want a good reservation. Then I say, ”Dr Fischer and his wife.” Brent Fischer It worked out well for me. Now, when they say Mr Fischer I know who they’re referring to. He’s Dr and I’m Mr. Monk One [to Brent] Can you give us a little history about your father and what he’s been involved with musically? Clare Fischer If you get him talking, he won’t stop. Monk One That’s what we’re here for. Brent Fischer [to Clare] You can cut in anywhere you like. [to audience] One thing you should know about my father, is that one of the ways in which he was able to become such a good writer is that when he was in high school he would play every single instrument in the orchestra. When the teacher wanted a good part he would give him the instrument and a fingering chart and he would learn it. And that was a tremendous educational influence. Clare Fischer Also orchestrationally. Brent Fischer Yes, to learn about the different features and peculiarities of every instrument. It was also in the orchestra that he met his true love, his wife right there, Donna. Clare Fischer She played viola in the orchestra and I played cello. That was right there [points]. Brent Fischer But they did not get married right out of high school. Her mother would not let him marry her because he was a musician. Clare Fischer No, she was a classical musician and to her I was a jazzer. She was snobbish as hell [laughter]. [shouts] You’re wrong, mother! Brent Fischer I’m sure there are jazz musicians today who won’t let their kids marry a punk rocker or a heavy metal head, same thing. He got his masters degree at Michigan State University and then moved to LA in the 1950s and ended up working with his own big band, worked for other big bands as a writer, backing up many famous groups of the time, the '50s and '60s. Then he got into the TV and film industry and if any of you have watched any TV shows from the '60s and '70s, chances are you’ve heard him play. Do any of you remember the theme song from the Columbo Murder Mysteries? Before synthesizers, before pitch-bend on organs, there used to be a felt strip and you could move your finger along it and it would go up and down in pitch. And that’s him moving his fingers along. Clare Fischer 'Daa-de-da daa-de-da, daa-de-da-da-duh.' That’s a lot of sliding. Brent Fischer Yeah, he played on The Brady Bunch, just about every major motion picture that was recorded in the late '60s and early '70s. He was in on the developments that took place in organs and keyboards. Once they got the synthesizers, though, he wasn’t quite so interested anymore. There’s something about the organ and the keyboards that still have an orchestrational use. Synthesizers and sound effects were not as appealing… Clare Fischer ...their musical qualities... Brent Fischer ...as the orchestrational qualities of the original instruments. I have, however, got into that a little bit. I started out as a drummer. He was nice enough to get me a set. I was playing on cardboards boxes and stuff from when I was three years old. I got my first set when I was six. Later on I got interested in electric bass. Still got my degree in percussion, symphony percussion - timpani, vibraphone, marimba, these instruments – but continued working as an electric bass player. He's had a Latin jazz quintet since 1978 or ’79. At one point he was using an upright bass player and it wasn’t quite the sound he was looking for. At that point I’d just become skilled at electric bass and he decided he liked the sound of the electric bass more. Clare Fischer Not just the sound, you hear the pitch more. On an upright bass when you get down low all you hear is the thump, you don’t get the pitch. Brent Fischer He made me earn my way into that group, there was no free ride just because I was his son. He is merciless to anyone and everyone. His favourite saying is, "There’s only one level and that is professional." So that was great experience for me because my butt was on the line at every gig. It didn’t matter that I was 16 and working these little nightclubs with his band, I still had to pull my weight. Anyway, I did get into computer music sequencing in the '80s, I got myself a really nice studio that had everything. That was before Digital Performer and Pro Tools and all that stuff, everything was MIDI at that point. I found for myself I was not quite as adept at computers as I’d like to be, so I got out of that. At the same time my musical interests expanded. And all the projects he’s [my father] done for the last 25 years, I’ve been involved in, either as a musician or as a contractor, a project manager, acting as his manager. Clare Fischer Yes, it’s called nepotism. [audience laughter] Brent Fischer Exactly. That made me able to absorb all the different things I saw him working with, not through personal experience of playing them myself, but learning how he had to write for an alto clarinet or the different possibilities with every little instrument in the orchestra, including some of the unusual ones that are his favourites. There are quite a few instruments that are out there that people don’t use very often, for instance, bass saxophone. I became interested in that. So you could say that electronic and synthesized music was old school for me. 'New school' is writing for instruments now. I’ve only been doing it for about 12 years, and only seriously and professionally for the last five, but I think it’s the place where I feel most comfortable. After that he started writing string arrangements for himself and for… Clare Fischer Brent Fischer No, he started for Rufus and Chaka Khan, if anyone remembers them from the '70s, Santana and the Jackson 5. Remember the Jackson 5 before Michael Jackson? Then the work for Prince started, there was a CD for Paul McCartney, actually it was an LP, we still had LPs back then. Then the work for Prince started in '85, the first thing we did for him was the Parade album together with a movie called Under The Cherry Moon, the film he did after Parade. Then Prince produced some songs for a CD, the first English language CD for a Canadian lady who was only usually singing in French, Celine Dion. He asked my father to produce some string arrangements for her first English language album. Since then we’ve worked for Dru Hill, Toni Braxton, Natalie Cole. That’s also the point where he got his doctorate from his alma mater and in the middle of this whole thing, in the early '90s, he re-met Donna at a high school reunion. Clare Fischer That was the greatest thing that’s ever happened to me. Brent Fischer After nearly 45 years of being apart, they’ve now been married for 12… Clare Fischer 13 years. And I’m 77 and she’s 75, so it’s late. Brent Fischer But they’re happier than ever. We work together on charts now. Sometimes I’ll write things, sometimes he’ll do them by himself. My part started about 12, 13 years ago when there were some string arrangements that he wasn’t interested in doing for people. Sometimes they’d want him to collaborate with keyboard players who’d written out parts on keyboards that he’d already orchestrated for the strings. He prefers to write from the ground up and have complete artistic control. Clare Fischer Those people who want you to do it that way don’t know what writing is about, they only know what they want. You should never work for anybody if they know what they want. Brent Fischer I, on the other hand, don’t mind collaborating with people as long as the writer is talented. I think it’s a challenge to put different peoples’ ideas together. I’d like to add a historical fact. I was talking to Oh No and Todd Simon, we were at a wonderful dinner together with all the guys from the Red Bull Music Academy. They were talking about DJing, and I think I had the line on who the first person was to mix. And it didn’t even happen in the 20th century, it happened in the 19th, and it was the composer Charles Ives. Look him up. Clare Fischer: Look under insurance [laughs]. Brent Fischer He was an insurance magnate, that’s how he made his money. But he was also a fabulous orchestral composer of the late 19th century and he had this habit where you’d hear the orchestra playing, you’d hear it at a certain tempo, and then all of a sudden it sounded like a marching band were coming from a distance. It would take over the piece - this was before faders - you’d hear that part for a while and then it would fade out and he’d go back to the other thing he was writing. Little historical fact for you there. Monk One I’m wondering if you can take us back to the album you arranged for Dizzy Gillespie and tell us what that was like. Clare Fischer First of all I worked with a lot of musicians from Detroit. One of them was Donald Byrd and he and I became very good friends. At that time there was a series of albums that had a trumpet player and strings on them, and they wanted us to do an album like that. So I wrote this album. He played the album that we did for Dizzy and when he heard that he asked me to write for him. I was so taken aback because by that time I worshipped him, being a live bebopper. Go ahead. Monk One When was this? Clare Fischer Don’t ask me times, sir. I’m older. Brent Fischer I believe it was in the early '60s, late '50s or early '60s. Monk One Was it after that point you began working with Cal Tjader? Clare Fischer My relationship with him goes way back. Years ago I worked as an accompanist with a vocal group called The Hi-Lo’s and we often did concerts that Cal Tjader's group played at. I heard his music and the type of thing it was and got to know him. It just clicked and eventually I wrote several albums for him, played on some, wrote others. Brent Fischer I remember being here in Seattle when he was on tour with Cal Tjader 28 years ago, in 1977. He brought me and my sister along, all up and down the Northwest here, and I remember that gig we did in Seattle. Some of the guys in the Northwest Symphonia were here, too, I was talking to them and they still remember it. Monk One Was it when you were working with Cal Tjader that you first began exploring Latin music? Clare Fischer Yes and no. When I was at university I roomed with a lot of Latinos. I got exposed to different varieties - Cuban music, commercial Latin, including the ones who were known at the time like Xavier Cugat. It was just something I naturally fell into. Because I was rooming with the Latinos I learned how to speak Spanish. To me it’s not just one thing. When you plunge into a culture you plunge into the complexity, the completeness of it. Monk One In the '70s I believe you started a band called [Salsa Picante]? Brent Fischer That’s now called The Clare Fischer Latin Jazz Quintet, but that was the original name. Clare Fischer: I was trying to go along with the vogue, giving everything a name, like The Beatles - Salsa Picante. Monk One Can we listen to something from that band so everyone can hear just how deeply you got into those rhythms. Clare Fischer [to Clare] You pick, I’m too old. Brent Fischer He was actually playing something on the piano from one of these albums [looks through records]. You want to hear something Latin-sounding or the thing I was talking about with the quartet? Monk One Let’s hear something Latin. Brent Fischer OK, I’m scared to touch it in case I ruin it. Let’s hear the first track from side two. Clare Fischer This is when they had sides to records. (music: Salsa Picante - Pajara Loco) Monk One: Alright. That was Pajara Loco. Clare Fischer Pa-jara loco, accent on the first syllable. Monk One Crazy bird. Brent Fischer If you notice there were some synthesizer sounds on there, those were just from an organ he had and you can get a clear example of using sounds in an orchestrational sense. He had the background pads and I believe it was because we couldn’t afford to have a string section. He would have preferred that, and then some of the different melodic things in there were where he would have preferred a clarinet… we did have a flute player in there. But we didn’t have the budget for any of the other orchestral instruments, but that’s the way he’s thinking when he’s composing. Monk One One of the things we could hear on there was the use of different keyboard textures. Starting in the '70s with the electric piano it seems like you were one of the first people to explore that sound. Can you explain what led you into that? Clare Fischer First of all, I was working in the studios in Los Angeles and it seemed no one wanted to get into that. I just loved the digital piano. Brent Fischer This is before the digital piano, this is the Fender Rhodes we’re talking about. Clare Fischer Even then we’re talking about an electronic piano. Keyboards are strange things when it comes to improvising. Some of them are improvising-friendly, some are not. When I got into an instrument where it seemed that everything just flowed on it I went for it and that’s how I got into the electronic keyboards. Monk One What was the reaction from audience? Clare Fischer I never cared. Brent Fischer I think the worst thing was he got tired of playing on substandard pianos. Clare Fischer Oh, you go from club to club. My god [look of disgust]! Brent Fischer But as long as you had a Fender Rhodes or some sort of electronic keyboard that was in shape, you had consistency. Monk One So you had the same keyboard and took it on the road with you? Clare Fischer No, but by then the Fender Rhodes was quite common. Brent Fischer Sometimes we’d have one there, sometimes we’d take our own. Clare Fischer Depending how far it was. Monk One And then, as new keyboards came out on each successive record there was a different keyboard on every album it seems, at least up until the early '80s. Clare Fischer: I did a lot of work for Yamaha. They kept coming out with things and I kept using them, that’s how I got into them. I always loved it when I was working on a session if there was someone who could program. I could play the instrument but I was never interested in getting the electronic knowledge to programme it. Monk One Let’s talk about the string arrangements you did. With Toni Braxton were you working in the studio? Brent Fischer The typical way it works, not just with Toni, is we ask them to send us something as close to what the final mix is going to be, minus the orchestra. So they’d already have the rhythm track. Clare Fischer Then he would transcribe it and I would write the arrangement to the transcription. Brent Fischer They’d send us a tape and I would take down everything note for note: the vocal line, the guitar solos, basslines, every drum beat, if there was a drum fill in there he’d want me to write it out. He likens it to fitting a jigsaw puzzle together, so if I write out everything that’s happening, every little line in the background, he can see the pieces and fit it all together. That way he doesn’t step on vocalists with one of his string or woodwind lines. Clare Fischer The fiendish thing at that time were guys who wrote over arrangements [laughs]. Brent Fischer This will make more and more sense 10, 15, 20 years from now. Monk One The fear is, in the mix, they might haul down the whole arrangement. Do you have any control over that? Clare Fischer That depends on how close you are to the people you're working with. Most of the time they have that feeling of omnipotence. It’d have to be, "Excuse me, I’m a bitcher, not just a Fischer, but a bitcher.” Finally, they got tired of me complaining and backed off and let me do what I wanted to do. There’s no sense in doing it - and this isn’t a matter of self-preoccupation or conceit - if you allow somebody to doctor your product, it’s like becoming a whore. It’s not the right thing to do. A producer thinks if he’s going to have that position, he must say something to justify that position, even if he’s got nothing to say. And boy, they are a pain in the culo. [audience laughter] Brent Fischer I can give you an example of that. Once I was taking a little holiday in Europe and he called in. He said: “I need Robert Palmer to do something, I need a transcription. And I said "where is he right now?” And he said, “He’s in Milan". So I said, "Im in Switzerland, I’ll just take the train down there.” I took it down, went to his studio, they gave me a tape, I stayed up all night writing it down. I sent it to him, he wrote the string arrangement, later on when we got the record back we found out they had changed a couple of key chord progressions at the end of the song. They were now completely different from what I had sent to him. Everything that the orchestra was based on had been obliterated toward the end, but they kept the orchestra there. So you had the orchestra set to one set of chord progressions that now weren’t there. And that didn’t seem to bother them. Clare Fischer They’re producers, not listeners. Brent Fischer It got released that way. These are some of the funny things that happen. Clare Fischer I don’t think they’re funny. Brent Fischer Strange, unusual. monk One You were mentioning the transcriptions, and before everyone came up to the hall we were listening to an old live recording of the Cal Tjader Group and after listening to the song Dr Fischer came over and played the song just from listening to what had happened. Clare Fischer That wasn’t difficult, that was my song. Brent Fischer That wasn’t your song, that was written by Dave McKay. Clare Fischer I beg your pardon. Brent Fischer The point is, to develop your ears to the point where you can hear... I liken it to how we can see colors. We can look around the room and that’s red and that’s black and so on. But not everybody has the capability to hear something and say: "That’s an E Flat major chord with a raised 9." That’s a key ability. He heard the song, understood what the notes were without actually having remembered as he’d played it 30 years ago. He was able to hear it, realise what the notes were and play it back. A working knowledge of keyboard will give you capabilities you never knew existed. They will bring out your creativity and enable you to work a lot faster when you’re trying to figure out your own material. Clare Fischer Besides that, when you start thinking of harmonic structures, I studied classical composing when I was 11 years old, got into jazz writing when I was 13 and ran into a wide variety of things, got into writing Latin jazz. That went along with my meeting the guys who spoke Spanish. It was important to me... I heard so many people write music for Latins and it seemed they didn’t have a hell of an idea what was going on. Brent Fischer Just like when you learn a foreign language you need a good accent. Clare Fischer Anyone here speak a foreign language? Brent Fischer Everybody here has English as their second language. You learn the language well and have the accent or dialect right, like speaking French the way they do in Paris rather than Montreal. Clare Fischer Damn it, either you’re listening or you’re not. Most Americans don’t listen when they hear a foreign language, they don’t get the idea of what they’re delivering. It’s faulty as hell. Sorry, I swear too much. Brent Fischer The point is, I got into many styles of ethnic music, starting out with Latin jazz and Brazilian music, and it made me realise there are certain things you have to unlearn from what you know about music to be able to deal with it from a different culture if you want it to be authentic or idiomatically correct. That makes it more comfortable to work with music from those countries and to merge music from different countries. He’d taken an old German folk song and turned it into a Latin mambo for his Latin jazz group, complete with the lyrics, he has vocalists singing in German. Later on he did it with a Japanese folk song and merged that it into a Brazilian samba. I have one here. But I think you had things you wanted to play. Clare Fischer I don’t care, you play what you want. Brent Fischer This is quite a long song so I’ll play you the first section. (music: Clare Fischer - unknown) Clare Fischer To me it’s always been very important to be doing the language that the music is written in. The record companies will fight you tooth and nail. “Oh no, it’s an American audience, they don’t understand.” Well, that’s nonsense. I put out a German number, it’s in German: ‘Du, Du Liegst Mir Im Herzen’. My father used to sing that to me as a child. It doesn’t have an English translation to me, so it got recorded in German. They say to me: “Nobody will ever understand that.” Here I am performing down in Mexico City and they’re calling for this German song, “Du Du, play that number.” How can they be so wrong? You must get it into you head that the record companies are not going to be any smarter than you are. Follow your tastes and preferences in what you do. Don't let them browbeat you. They think they’re the commanding power, and they are, but by god, if you fight them doggedly, they’ll back off. So do it. Brent Fischer Now, he [gestures to interviewer] noticed something, he was very astute, he asked me who the singers were. These were singers we worked with in LA all these years and he coached them to sound authentically Japanese. He also said it reminded him of Singers Unlimited, and one of them was from Singers Unlimited and dad has also written for them. So, good ear. Monk One You said you write for the Hi-Lo’s and I wondered if you could tell me about vocal arranging because I imagine that must be different from symphonic arrangements. Clare Fischer Prior to working with the Hi-Lo’s I had never written any vocal arrangements. Does anybody here know the Hi-Lo’s and their leader Gene Puerling? He was their leader and arranger and he was an original. I heard their music and said: “This is interesting, it’s not just the pile of junk that most people put out.” So I got into doing it and when it comes down to it, it’s not a question of whether they can sing it or not. People can go: “Oh, we have high voices…” It’s not that, it’s whether they can hear it. If you know they have ears, you can do anything you want and you know they’ll do it well. Monk One You have to keep in mind the range of the human voice though. Clare Fischer Each person I had was unusual. The Hi-Lo’s, for instance, their lead tenor, he could sing up to the F at the top that the sopranos have. You just get used to working with people who can do it, and later on I became associated with a fellow who had been one of the members of the Hi-Lo’s. He was unusual in being able to sight-sing anything you stick in front of him, which most people can’t do. He can play woodwinds superbly, all of them. And he improvises his butt off. That’s a complete musician for me, that's what I prefer working with - somebody who knows what he’s doing. Monk One You brought up improvisation there. How do you write arrangements which take improvisation into account? Clare Fischer That depends upon the person improvising, you have to adjust for that facility. My interest in music has always been harmonic and as a result of that I get into the harmonics when I improvise. You have to flow into that, that’s like speaking a foreign language. If you’ve got those sounds down and you can express yourself in them, that’s a completely different world. Monk One Could you explain what you mean by harmonic as opposed to a melodic or rhythmic interest in it? Clare Fischer Most people know the melody and there are certain bass notes which go along with that with the harmonies. Most people aren’t awfully considerate of the harmonies and I think you have to get into those to know how a piece will go. Brent Fischer That’s something that a working knowledge of the piano will do, you can start experimenting round different combinations of notes that lead you to chord progressions. You start hearing things with your ears. Clare Fischer Most people are not used to putting things all together. When you put a player on the piano you hear the totality of the sound. The next thing comes up, you’re not writing for the piano, you have to know how to write for that. That’s important. Brent Fischer In the case of this orchestra we worked with last night, we didn’t know who was going to be able to solo in the group. Not everyone has that capability. Clare Fischer It turned out well. Brent Fischer Yeah, we left spaces in the charts where we gave chord progressions to a section, for instance, everybody in the sax section. Once we found who would take the solo we gave that to him or her, then we put the backgrounds in other sections. For instance, if there’s going to be a sax solo, then have the backgrounds in the strings with some colours in the brass parts. And if the trumpet player is going to take the solo, have the background played by the sax section or flutes and clarinet. You can write the backgrounds in, but you just leave chord progressions for the soloists and he improvises that. Monk One So the soloist’s guide is basically the chord progression? Clare Fischer: Yes, and a feeling of time. If you can’t improvise in time, then stay off. Rhythmical music is rhythmical music. If you’ve ever seen someone who doesn’t know how to dance try to get up and move around with music… Brent Fischer He knows how to dance. Monk One Well, we might ask for a demonstration later. Clare Fischer No, not at my age. Monk One You mentioned your father earlier. What type of background did he have? Clare Fischer He was a barbershop quartet-er. His raison d’etre was to write arrangements for that. There was a group called the SPEBQSA, the Society For The Preservation And Encouragement of Barbershop Quartet Singing In America. Monk One Oh yeah, that one. Brent Fischer I’m not sure they’re still around now. Clare Fischer: Well, that doesn’t matter, it existed. My dad was crazy about that. You used to see him sit at the piano, and plunk and plunk. Brent Fischer He was basically self-taught. Clare Fischer Not basically, wholly. Brent Fischer He came up on it like myself. I always had music in my household. I used to lie under the grand piano with my dog while he was practicing or composing when I was two years old. Monk One: Lucky guy. And was your uncle also a musician? Brent Fischer His brother, my uncle. Clare Fischer I also had an uncle who was a musician, that was the first one in the family. That was from my mother’s side. But from my father’s side it was only barbershop quartets. Monk One Barbershop quartets are obviously vocal groups, so you were having the experience of hearing that? Clare Fischer Usually, when you have four male singers, you have a tenor, baritone and bass. But with the barbershop quartet the melody was in the second voice, and you had a tenor over that, so it was a matter of harmonising. Clare Fischer As you can see, my writing for this type of stuff is greatly influenced by my classical composing. You just can’t say I grew up on Duke Ellington or something. There’s Shostakovich, Prokofiev, Bartok, the whole works. Those are all a very important part of my early training and exposure, they’re a part of me. Monk One What was the process for making what we just heard? Did you get the vocal track...? Brent Fischer The vocal and the other instruments that you heard on there, the bass, the little rhythm. Monk One And you transcribed that? Brent Fischer Yes, this is very sparse as far as the stuff that they send. It was just the singing, the bass and that little bit of electronic percussion that you hear there. Monk One So everything was written around that sketch you got and you would send back the recording? Did you also do the mix that we heard? Clare Fischer Not really, I expressed what I would like to have happened but you can’t be there; and again, you’re fighting with the record company. Brent Fischer Well, in this particular case there was no record company. Prince had total control, he would do the final mix. There might be an occasional time when he would ask us to mix something, but that would just be a rough mix to use as a guide, just so he would know which orchestral colours were important to my father to be brought out at that point. Monk One What do you think of Prince’s bass playing as a bassist yourself? Brent Fischer He’s a talented guy on almost any instrument. When you called Paisley Park Records and you were put on hold, you’d hear all these great records he’s recorded where he’s just playing guitar by himself, sometimes the piano. I think he has… Clare Fischer He’s sick [laughs]. Brent Fischer He has skills on every basic electronic instrument. Monk One Who are some of your influences as a bassist? I understand you’ve been developing an actual bass guitar. Brent Fischer No, I’ve been testing it and I’m going to be presenting this instrument that’s made in Germany by this bass maker. It’s a completely new design. My main influence on electric bass is Jeff Berlin, but he plays just a standard four string. I got interested in six string later on because there are so many more chordal and range possibilities. On a six string I can cover more or less two-thirds of the piano whereas a four string has a much smaller area of the range. Clare Fischer There are certain times when, with that many strings he plays just like a guitarist, strumming chords. Brent Fischer You have a lot more possibilities that way. But this man I discovered in Germany, there’s a company called Frameworks Guitars, and they made these guitars with just the shape or the outline without having the body filled in, so it’s very lightweight, it’s good for travel and it’s collapsible, so it packs up neatly. And the man who worked for that company then made his own company called Contour Bass and he has designed a similar style bass and it’s also collapsible. It weighs four pounds, approximately two kilos, which is about one quarter of the weight of a normal bass, so it saves me probably $2,000 a year on chiropractor bills for my shoulder, neck and back. It’s really easy to travel with. You have the DVD up and ready? Monk One Yeah, this is the DVD. Brent Fischer This is the demo. (video: Brent Fischer plays Frameworks Bass) Clare Fischer I’ve never seen this. Brent Fischer Actually, you have. This is the framework itself, that’s the body part. It just screws in and then there’s the top body part. Those are acoustic resonating chambers so it works as an acoustic instrument. [Brent Fischer demonstrates playing on the DVD] Clare Fischer Now you have to ask yourself the question, how does a bass player come up learning how to play like that? That’s all improvising. Excuse me, I use the musical term, he’s a bitch. Monk One How about genius? Clare Fischer I use the other. Monk One Amazing. So we don’t have a lot of time left and one of the things I’d love to hear, and I think everybody else would, is some playing, some solo piano. We heard a little bit of it yesterday. Brent Fischer Does anyone have any questions before we do that? Otherwise we can wrap this up. Clare Fischer I don’t have to play the piano, it’s been interesting the way it is. Brent Fischer Why don’t you play, you were doing minor sides before, do you want to do that? Clare Fischer Oh, my goodness. Brent Fischer OK, which ever one you want to do. Monk One Anything you play will be good. (music: Clare Fischer plays electric piano / applause) Clare Fischer Thank you very much. I have to express something at this point. Usually, when you get someone who is a jazz pianist, if he plays sophisticated harmonic stuff, he’s not very good at the blues, or if he plays the blues, he’s not very good at the sophisticated stuff. I spent all of my teenage years working in a black club with a black group. I learnt how to play the blues so I added all that to my thing and I feel a lot more complete because of it. End of lesson. Monk One Are you still performing these days with your group. Clare Fischer: Not as often as I would like to. You almost have to go out and create your own gigs, nobody calls you. I mostly write these days. Monk One If anyone has any questions this is the time. Audience member I have a question about Columbo. I know you said you did the theme song for it, but I also notice the show would have a lot of really rousing pieces throughout it... Brent Fischer He wasn’t one of the writers on them but he played most of the keyboard parts you hear in the background. Audience member I shouldn’t share my secrets with all the sample heads in the room, but go and watch Columbo. If you’re into samples, it’s great stuff. Monk One You just brought up an interesting point about sampling. Has your music been sampled that you know of? Brent Fischer Well, certainly last night. Monk One Yes, but as far as receiving royalties for sampling. Clare Fischer Oh, forget about royalties, don’t think about earning money. Brent Fischer We have clearances with Harry Fox Agency and they send us contracts. Every once in a while as a new medium that becomes available and they send us forms to fill out. If you order a Clare Fischer song to be your ringtone on your mobile phone, we’ll get 10c or something for that. Clare Fischer I don’t remember that. Monk One So you’re not composing for ringtones nowadays [laughs], arranging for cell phones? We’ll get into that the next time you come, I’m sure. Anybody else? I’d like to thank you very much, it’s been a great pleasure. Clare Fischer My pleasure. [applause]

---

Title: Dennis Bovell
Date: 2015-04-21
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/dennis-bovell-bass-culture/

Dennis Bovell
Dennis Bovell’s youthful exuberance belies a long and distinguished career taking in some surprisingly far-flung corners of the music industry. Responsible for more or less inventing the lovers rock sound with the three-part harmonies of Matumbi, Dennis went on to produce some of the defining records of British reggae. But as well as his work with artists like Linton Kwesi Johnson and Janet Kay, Dennis produced classic records with the Slits, rock band Orange Juice, afrobeat legend Fela Kuti, Japanese master Ryuichi Sakamoto and good old popstars like Bananarama! Still as busy as ever, Dennis joined us on the couch at the 2004 Red Bull Music Academy to recall how an immigrant from Barbados became involved in Jamaican music and expound on exploitation and other downsides of the music industry.
Hosted by FERGUS MURPHY For that extra special Friday feeling it’s an absolute pleasure to welcome Dennis Bovell [applause]. We’ve got enough music for the whole day and we’re going to start talking and get into it all in a moment. But first a song. DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, this one’s called “Love the Reggae.” (music: Dennis Bovell - “Love the Reggae” / applause) That's a song I constructed to be a tone of appreciation to all people that have been involved in reggae over the years. Unfortunately, I couldn’t name everyone, so at the end I say [adopts toasting style], “If you never get this message accept this apology.” [laughs] The reason why it’s still at the drawing board stage, why it’s never been released, is because I played it to my good friend, the poet Linton Kwesi Johnson, and he said, “I don’t like that song. You never mention me.” [laughter] So I said you’ve got my apology on that one. At the moment I’m involved in producing an old ska band from England called Madness. FERGUS MURPHY One Step Beyond DENNIS BOVELL ...and all that kind of thing. They’ve just reformed and I’m currently doing their new album. And they wanted to do that song, so I just thought I’d share that with you right now. FERGUS MURPHY You can hear from the song, you shout out various countries. Reggae has brought you all over the world, almost in a very traditional way as a musician and a travelling producer. DENNIS BOVELL It sure has, it’s taken me to places I could never have afforded to have gone to; or maybe I wouldn’t know that I’d have loved to have been to. One of the craziest places was Poland, and in the early ’90s we went to play the shipyard in Gdansk. It was with Solidarity and the ANC in Poland, when Lech Walesa and Solidarity won the elections there. We went there to play and I was surprised at the knowledge of reggae. Also Iceland, in Reykjavik. And also Salvador de Bahia, and we’re quite frequent in Japan. I’ve recorded several Japanese artists. In fact, the first one was Ryuichi Sakamoto, the chief of Yellow Magic Orchestra. Don Letts, who’s a friend of mine, called me up one day and said, “I have a guy in Japan, who wants to meet you.” And it turned out to be Sakamoto, who was putting his first solo album togegther after Yellow Magic Orchestra, and this album was called B2 Unit. He heard I was building a studio and wanted to be the first person to use it, even before me. So he came over and cut the album, and since that I’ve been a frequent visitor to Japan. I cut the first Japanese lovers album, with a singer called Iriya, and produced Yellow Magic, Tokyo Ska Paradise Orchestra and a new Japanese band at the moment called Dub Sense Mania, the new reggae band on Sony. Also a couple of diverse lovers singers and I have to say the Japanese are out in front when it comes to appreciation of reggae, outside of normal reggae grounds. They have absolutely everything, they’re ardent collectors. They surprised me with having stuff you can’t even find in Jamaica. FERGUS MURPHY That’s today, but in fairness bring us back. Where did it all start? Where was little Dennis? DENNIS BOVELL At the age of 12 I was ordered to London by my parents. FERGUS MURPHY From? DENNIS BOVELL From Barbados. I was living with my grandparents in Barbados and my parents were living in London. And when I was 12, they thought it was time for me to go and live with them; and I didn’t want to go but I had to. They were already there, working, my mother was a doctor and my dad was a bus driver. FERGUS MURPHY That would be quite a common thing that people would leave to work in England and leave their children behind with the grandparents. DENNIS BOVELL And I was a victim of that circumstance. I ended up in London at the age of 12. I’d just begun to learn how to play guitar, which was one of the main reasons I didn’t want to leave, because my teacher was there, my mum’s younger brother. He was a musician touring around the world with a soca band because in Barbados the music tends to be more calypso being in the Eastern Caribbean, rather than Jamaica in the West with reggae. I’m arriving in London and my parents had lots of Jamaican friends. In the late ’50s, ’59, a couple of my uncles had gone to study in Jamaica at the University Of West Indies – one in mathematics, one in chemistry – and they would bring home Jamaican music. So we’d get to listen to it and I’d get interested in that. Then there was all my parents’ Jamaican friends, so there was lots more Jamaican music to listen to and I’d met up with a group of young boys my age who had a group. This was a pop group and they were looking for a singer and a guitarist, so I got in there. And we were trying to imitate Jimi Hendrix or B.B. King or Wilson Pickett or Otis Redding. On the death of Hendrix it was like the world had caved in. “What are we going to do now? The master has gone.” I didn’t fancy myself trying to create music in the same way Hendrix did, so we thought about being the most obscure thing you could imagine being and that was to be in a reggae band. At that time, reggae was very little known and very little liked. We’re talking 1966. Desmond Dekker had a hit with a song called “007,” and to me that was electric, so I wanted to play that kind of music. Everyone else was trying to do Otis Redding, Sam & Dave, trying to be funky. I was told, “If you’re going to play reggae, you’ll never get a gig.” But that was what we wanted to do. It was the kind of music where you could get hold of a girl and dance with her. Well, the funky stuff was all apart, but reggae was like, “Yeah, come on!” That appealed to me. [laughs] I wanted to make that kind of music too. So we formed a band called Matumbi. The word ‘Matumbi’ was the most African sounding name we could come up with, because having been brought up in London, there was no African history, it was Richard III and Charles I and shit like that. Henry VIII, what’s that got to do with me? I wanted hear about Shaka Zulu and people like that. So we started to investigate African history and show our Africanness by choosing an African name. And it’s ironic that that name came from an English lesson. We were doing O-level English, and it was a book called Mister Johnson by a novelist Joyce Carey, it was later made into a film. And in that book there was a Sergeant Gallup, and he had an African woman and her name was Matumbi, and the description of her was the most beautiful. And the word looked good on paper, too. So we took that name and we started to record our own songs. And we became political because at that time there was an English politician called Enoch Powell, who was blatantly racist, he was the father of the National Front. FERGUS MURPHY He made that famous speech about, “Rivers of blood will flow...” DENNIS BOVELL That’s right. And it was ironic because when black people started to come into England in numbers in the late ’50s, ’58 and ’59 – and he was the Minister of Health and he would’ve overseen lots of black people coming because lots of black people went to work in the health service – he would’ve initially picked the entrants. And then, when there was more than he wanted, he said, “Close the door now.” So he made a speech saying England was about to be swamped by an alien culture, there was going to be rivers of blood, racial war, all that shit. So we decided to answer him with some of our poems and songs. But when we went knocking on the record company doors they were, “We don’t want to hear that, can’t you write some love songs?” We wanted to be real here. So they turned us down because our original material was deemed too political, so we went into the studio and cut for a joke a cover of a Hot Chocolate song called “Brother Louie.” Now that song in itself was racial but they didn’t see that, because the story of Brother Louie is the story of a mixed relationship between a black girl and a white guy. So they didn’t let us talk on other political issues but they didn’t see that one, so they put it out. I was singing and I wasn’t really the singer of the band, I was the guitarist, so we did it sort of like a joke. And also because Brian Jones of the Rolling Stones had left his Mellotron, which was the first string machine, the first machine you could use to try to imitate an orchestra. And he’d left it in that studio where we were working and next door were Average White Band, who were doing their first album. We asked the guys if we could use it, and the instrument had been used on the Hot Chocolate version of that song. So we just did a reggae version of that and they let us in, gave us a contract and we were signed to Trojan Records, the beast. FERGUS MURPHY We’ll get onto that later. Matumbi was about exploring Africanism and there’s obviously a sense of exploring identity through music. You’ve come to somewhere else, and you’re in a new culture. DENNIS BOVELL A halfway house, nearly back to Africa. FERGUS MURPHY And what was the process of resolving that? DENNIS BOVELL It’s yet to be resolved because we still don’t know it all. Every October now is black history month, where you get to find out what black people did. But January to September and November to December, nothing said. It’s just the fact that the contribution of black people to this modern world has been played down, really heavily played down, so the young black kids are made to think that black people have done nothing in this world and deserve nothing in this world. And it’s all the political bullshit that we’re trying to clear away. For instance, if you told someone the blood bank was initiated by a black person, the traffic light, that was invented by some black guy, why should anyone want to deny us the right of knowing our history? What are they afraid of? FERGUS MURPHY Do you think it’s denied? DENNIS BOVELL It’s definitely denied. It’s underwritten. It’s been shoved under the carpet because of the greatest crime to humanity in history, known as slavery. I think there’s a great fear that if black people did what was done to them during that time, there would be hell on earth. FERGUS MURPHY Is Barbados still home or do you call London home? DENNIS BOVELL The world is home, man. Earth is home. FERGUS MURPHY You were doing funky stuff when you formed, and I have here a record of Matumbi doing a Temptations song, “Law Of The Land,” which is also a political song. DENNIS BOVELL The thing was, Trojan were more intent on making quick bucks. A song would be popular, “OK, make a reggae version.” It was cheapening reggae because it seemed reggae people weren’t able to compose stuff. We had to wait until something was composed and then we’d adapt it. That’s not the way. FERGUS MURPHY That’s a Jamaican tradition, though. DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, but there were also lots of great Jamaican composers that were played down because it was easier to get somebody to do a cover version than get people used to a new composition. That was the prejudice of radio, because radio DJs would play some tune that everyone knew and it would be easier to get on the circuit instead of playing something that was new and working it in the same way. All of the stuff that became popular had to be new at some time, and somebody had to play it, play it until people got to know what it was about, like it or not. How many times have you heard a song that you hated first time, and you’re walking down the street, it’s been pumped on the radio, you’ve been brainwashed by it and all of a sudden you find yourself whistling that tune? We weren’t given the same exposure. Reggae was mainly a soundsystem thing. The soundsystem was reggae’s radio. The soundsystem suddenly sprung up, and people would be doing dubplates and specials and making the reggae world wider. And then until they started having it on the radio... and in London we took it a stage further and started having reggae radio, there’s at least ten or 12 stations that play reggae, flat out, 24/7, and they’re illegal. What have you got there? FERGUS MURPHY “Law Of The Land.” DENNIS BOVELL This is a great song, The Temptations did the original. We covered it with Matumbi. FERGUS MURPHY What was the line-up of Matumbi? These are the guys you hooked up with when you first arrived. DENNIS BOVELL I was in school with these guys from the age of 12. There were three vocalists, of whom I was one. We had all come from a spiritual background. My grandfather is a preacher, the father of the guy who’s singing the first line on this song was a preacher, and the other one is now a preacher. So coming from a heavy religious background, it taught us how to deal with harmonies, because the church singing is very melodious. A lot of people were surprised that at the age of 14, 15 we could sing a harmony, so that was the focal point of our vocal ability. And then we had bass, keyboards, a horn section, and there we were pursuing being an orchestral outfit, because we had strings. We were trying to take reggae to an almost philharmonic division, by trying to do a Norman Whitfield song, because he was a great composer and great producer. And The Temptations being one of my all time favourite bands, the first bassline I ever played in public was the bassline to “My Girl,” [imitates bassline to “My Girl”]. FERGUS MURPHY We’ll get you to play that in a minute. This is “Law Of The Land.” (music: Matumbi - “Law Of The Land” / applause) Audience Member [inaudible] DENNIS BOVELL It’s called “Law Of The Land,” and the band’s called Matumbi. I was 17 then. FERGUS MURPHY That little scream at the end, that was the 17-year old you. Can you still get up there? DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, yeah. This was not really finished. As you can hear the lead voices are very far down in the mix. We’d done the track, but we hadn’t done the voices yet. Then we fell out with the record company, and they told us they’d lost the tapes. We went away and decided to do a bunch of stuff on our own. I was the engineer of a recording studio at that time, and we could get free studio time. So we were recording at my expense and not with Trojan paying. Trojan had paid for this recording up until that point where we’d done the backing track and we thought we’ll have room to negotiate for recording the vocals. They were like, “No, we’ve lost the tapes anyway.” And then, about two or three years later, once we’d gone and done our own recordings and were quite popular without them, these recordings suddenly appeared on an album called The Best Of Matumbi. As you can hear the voices there on that album you can hear the singers doing what would have been the horn parts [imitates horn section]. Then they put out that album and we never recovered from that really because to this day we’ve been having legal wrangles with them. For the last 30 years they’ve paid us no money and I’m really surprised to see that this track is out now because the company changed hands about five different times. Each new owner would call us and say, “Yo, we’ve just bought your stuff.” And we’d say, “Show us the contract,” and they were never able to show us any contract. The new Trojan Records is owned by a company called Sanctuary, which is a whole bunch of rock people. The owners of that company is a famous rock band. Is it Motörhead? FERGUS MURPHY Motörhead, that’s Lemmy. AUDIENCE MEMBER Black Sabbath. DENNIS BOVELL Black Sabbath, that’s right. That’s who owns it. They sent us contracts and said, “We know what went on in the past, but it wasn’t us and we want to make things right with you.” So I said, “Well, you’ve got 30 years of back royalties on that title for a start.” And I’ve seen that album as far as Korea, always fresh mint copies. San Diego, I’ve seen that album, and nobody’s ever paid us any royalties on that album. We just had a contract last week, which our lawyers are looking over. FERGUS MURPHY Dealing with the beast. DENNIS BOVELL That’s why we call them the beast. The original owners of Trojan, when we went there in 1971 looking for a deal, we were told, “This is the deal, sign it in ten minutes or get out of the office.” As a bunch of 15, 16, 17-year olds, what do you do? The door’s half open, we can sign and go in. We found out the deal meant the whole group, all seven of us, were going to get 3% off the recording. 97% was going elsewhere, while we were getting 3% between seven of us. FERGUS MURPHY It was very common in reggae that people would get paid for a session and you could forget about the rights. DENNIS BOVELL People would sell themselves. You could go to a company and they would not discuss royalties. Royalties were not part of the deal. It was like, “How much do you want for this tune?” And you’d get £100, £200, £300, then that was it, it was theirs. Audience Member [inaudible] DENNIS BOVELL In London. There were lots of people who had records released in Trojan, who didn’t know it had been released because they lived in Jamaica. It caused a lot of violence too. Leroy Smart, a friend of mine, he came to London because he found out someone had released his record in England. He didn’t know the guy, didn’t have a deal. So he walked into the place and said, “Who’s that guy?” Someone said, “Yeah, me.” And he walked straight up to him and stabbed him, a couple of times. Everyone was like, “Yeah [claps], great.” FERGUS MURPHY Don’t try this at home. [laughter] DENNIS BOVELL Don’t do it home, that was 20 years ago, now you’d get life. But it was kind of righteous violence as we saw it. He stabbed the guy and the police put him in jail. And when he came out of jail he came to see me and said, “Let’s make a new record.” “When?” “Now.” “You got the money?” “Let’s do it right away.” “You got the songs?” “No, I’m a singer, play what you like.” We were making up tracks right there and then and he’d say, “That’s one finished, I’ve got the lyrics to that.” And by the time we got to nine, I was thinking, ‘I’m writing songs for you here.’ And he was like, “Weeeelll, just do one more and that will be it.” I said no. “But an album’s ten, you’ve got five a side.” So we said, “Tell you what, sing another song on that track.” And that was the birth of doing a different song on the same rhythm track, and the album’s called Propaganda. FERGUS MURPHY A version? DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, but actually singing another song on the track that belonged to another song. Completely new composition, completely new top-line but the same chords. And we recorded and mixed the whole album in one night. And the next day he was out of there on a false passport and back to Jamaica. And that was because of piracy. AUDIENCE MEMBER What was the socio and economic status of visible minorities in London at that time? And do you think that played its part in your troop and other reggae troops being taken advantage of in terms of signing record deals, just taking bare minimum? DENNIS BOVELL For sure. The reason a lot of black people came to England in the first place, it was cheap labour. The same reason a lot of factories relocate to China, and Korea or Pakistan, is because they get even kids to work and don’t pay them. And the big fat cat stays the big fat cat and there’s lots of profits on that side and on the labour side it’s poverty. So coming from an Afro-Caribbean background it was positively sure that your parents would not be rich and your whole community would be rife with poor people. So life was cheap, let alone anything else. So that was the social standing of people who came from that area. And the first thing they’d say to you is, “Well, you know, we’re not going to sell a lot of this. So straight away the value of it is minus, so if we take it from you, we’ll be doing you a favour.” So you’d go into the studio and make your record and the guy would say, “Well, this is useless but I’ll take it off you.” And then you see it in the charts and they’d say, “Hey, I bought this from you, it’s in the contract, it’s mine forever more and the day after forever more.” Until it became illegal to sell your soul, a lot of souls were sold as a means of surviving or becoming popular. It’s really depicted in that Jimmy Cliff film, The Harder They Come. If you’ve ever seen that film, that’s real, that’s not beefed up. In fact, that’s mild compared to what went on. A song like “The Israelites,” Desmond Dekker, that song is planet famous and the authorship of the song is credited to a guy called Leslie Kong, a Jamaican Chinese guy, and he’s dead 30 years. So where’s the money going? Not to his family, but to the various record companies, a little bit here, a little bit there. I mean, the guy’s dead anyway, it’s nearly public domain. If you were alive, you’d be hard pushed to get something. There were a lot of artists on a label called Studio One, and the tales, artist after artist after artist after artist who was on Studio One never got paid, or they were bought out. The guy would say, “OK, I’ll give you ten shillings for this record and it’s mine forever, you’ve not got no more claim on it.” And, if you’ve never had ten shillings before and you wanted it, you’d say, “Yeah.” You’ll be thinking, ‘I can write more songs than this.’ But that was probably the one song that was going to make you a millionaire, and you’ve sold it. It’s very tempting, especially when we were 17, 16-years old, just left school, and your father’s working every hour god sends and he can only make so much. You’ve just cut a record and you’ve made more than he’ll make in a whole week, and you’re like, “Dad, you should been a musician, dude.” And he’s saying, “Yeah? You wait till they rip you off.” And he was right. FERGUS MURPHY Was that experience an influence on you becoming a producer? And at what point did playing guitar and singing and wanting to cut a deal turn into wanting to take more control? DENNIS BOVELL Absolutely. I was fortunate enough to go to a school that was pretty much like this and had a recording studio. That’s where I got my teeth into recording and twiddling the knobs. It ended up that every time we went into the studio, there’d be arguments with the engineer trying to describe what kind of sound we wanted. At that time it was, “You can’t have that much bass, you’re crazy. It’ll blow the speakers. You can’t have your treble like that. Everything must be very flat. Zero, zero, zero. You can’t go above zero.” Sometimes I’d just go, “Stand aside. You see those knobs? I know how to twiddle them. You see that piece of paper? That’s my diploma.” And consequently, when we went into the studio, instead of having an engineer, I’d say, “Give me an assistant. I want someone who can plug stuff in. I don’t know how your patch bay works. You get me someone who patches your patch bay. The sound is in here and I’m going to put the sound that I want on my record. When you’re doing Status Quo or whoever, do it like that.” Can you imagine saying to Jimi Hendrix, “That’s in the red.” Or to Jeff Beck, “That guitar’s distorted, man.” [laughter] And we would get that all the time from the sound engineers. They would go, But it’s in the red!” I wanted it in the red, I wanted it to go like that ’cause it’s not loud enough. Also, it was the battle of ears against eyes. Your ears would say it’s good, whereas your eyes would say, “No, it’s in the red.” So what? Cover your eyes and cover the dials. It’s sound, dude, it ain’t film. Use these. If it sounds good and you like it, walk with it. After many arguments with engineers and recording studios, I decided I’m going to do this, I’m going to be a producer and I’m going to dictate what the sound sounds like. That was my reason for becoming a producer, and also that I would own the rights to all my own recordings. Instead of some guy coming along and saying, “I’m the producer.” “What did you do?” “I paid the studio.” That was the criteria for a lot of reggae producers, they paid the studio. In 1974, I was invited to be the musical director of a recording with Louisa Mark. We went in and did a track called “Caught You in a Lie.” I ended up playing bass, the organ, piano, guitar and doing sound engineering as well on this track. And when the record came out, the guy who booked the studio, it was all passed to him, produced by this guy. And to this day the guy wouldn’t know A from B. He wouldn’t know how to tune, whether it was in or out of tune. We wanted to cancel that. The producer should be someone who knows about the music, who knows how to play that stuff. If the musician’s not playing what the producer wants, he should be able to take that instrument and show him how to play it, or if he can’t get it, say, “Yo, you’re dismissed.” Many times I’ve been in and just ridiculed the so-called producer, deliberately played out of tune. Play the guitar bang out of tune, and the producer’s sat there going, “Yeah, great.” And then the band will be like [suppressed laughter], and then you’ll go, “I think I’ll do that again, it’s out of tune.” And he’ll say, “Yeah, I thought there was something strange about it.” You know? FERGUS MURPHY And what were the first productions that you got involved with? DENNIS BOVELL At first I was my own guinea pig. I started to produce stuff using a bunch of different names. It was always ‘try and spot Dennis Bovell’ because I had the ability to play lots of instruments and do lots of things and it seemed unreal to a lot of people. “Is that you again?” “Yeah.” “Oh!” “Is that you again?” “Yeah.” “Oh!" So I started giving myself different names, I called myself Blackbeard and African Stone, as well as Matumbi and then the Dub Band later. And I called myself Dennis Curtis then Dennis Matumbi and another time it was 4th Street Orchestra. And I’d look in the reggae charts at the Top 20 and say to myself, “Yeah, I got fourteen in there.” But I was exposed by a guy, who was supposed to be my friend, who went [affects angry voice], “Dennis, it’s you, we’ve got to tell people it’s you.” And I did a program for the BBC called Rockschool where I let them film me doing the drums one time, playing the bass another time, playing the keyboard another time, guitar, doing the vocals, I was the engineer and I let them show it on TV and I was exposed. So I had to be just Dennis Bovell after that. FERGUS MURPHY They did you a favour [laughter]. You’re going to play us something from those early producing days. DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, my most hailed production is by a girl called Janet Kay. I met her when she was doing backing vocals in the studio and I was the engineer. As an engineer you usually don’t interfere with the production, you just do your job, fiddle with the knobs. “You want it louder?” “Louder.” “You like that frequency? More treble, more bass?” “No.” Just like a machine. But I felt sorry for them as they were trying to battle their way through these harmonies and they didn’t really know where to put the nine or six or the 11 or the 13, it was a musical thing. I could’ve sat there and we’d have been trying to do it all night. I’d have been making money because you’re sitting there, they’re getting it wrong, you need more time. But I had other things to do [laughter], so I said, “Look, I’m going to show you how to arrange it. Now you sing that note, you sing that note, you sing that note. Go! OK, record it.” And they were like, “Wow, we thought you were just the engineer, we didn’t know you had any musical ability.” So she gave me her telephone number and said, “If you’ve got anything you want doing at any point.” And she was a great singer, she is a great singer. Janet Kay, one of the best reggae singers, full stop. She had the ability to sing really high votes, almost Minnie Riperton style. And I’d written this song called “Silly Games,” and it had this very high note in it and people kept telling me, “You ain’t gonna find anybody to sing that,” because it was (sings very very high note) – one of them. Minnie Riperton. “You think Minnie Riperton gonna sing that? She’s dead anyway.” (laughter) When I heard Janet, I thought, ‘Woah, she can scale that tune.’ So I got her in the studio and got my friend Drummie Zeb from Aswad. He and I went into the studio and cut the drums and the bass track, so he’s in the drum booth, I’m in the control room and I’m engineering and playing the bass. He doesn’t know what he’s playing. I’m telling him, “This is the line, this is the drum pattern,” because I play bass and I invented this drum pattern, because Sly Dunbar had taken over the whole of reggae drumming, he was the king, and so I was like, “Woah, we gotta get in there somewhere.” It was all this four-to-the-floor (imitates drum beat) everywhere, every song was that. I was like, “Yo, the secret to changing reggae is hi-jacking the drum pattern; get enough people to follow you, and you’re gone.” So I invented this drum pattern. “Whoa, not a lot of people are gonna be able to play this, it’s difficult.” So I went to Drummie Zeb, who for me in England at that time is the greatest reggae drummer. He’s still in the top ten, but I don’t know who’s come up since then. So, I went to explain to him that I what I wanted him to do was play on the hi-hat and that was going to lead the whole thing and the snare would come sometimes, quite similar to Afrobeat and calypso things where the hi-hat is the main focus. He’d invented a thing called ‘the flying cymbal,’ he used to call it ‘the pea-soup beat’ (pss-sppp, psss-sppp). Disco stole that, but before that it was reggae, in the days of Johnny Clarke “Move Out of Babylon,” all them kind of tunes there, we call that the flying cymbal. AUDIENCE MEMBER It was also very close to bebop drummers. DENNIS BOVELL Absolutely. So I’d come up with this beat and we had the drum and bass track down, then I got Janet in, and then over the course of two months I put all the other instruments on in my own time. So the three of us were the band, we released the record and it got to number one in three weeks. “What are we gonna do now? Ain’t got time to make another one, let’s go on tour.” [laughter] And this is the song. (music: Janet Kay - “Silly Games” / applause) FERGUS MURPHY That’s what’s called ‘lovers rock.’ Not everyone knows what lovers rock is. It is still the case that some people just don’t get it. DENNIS BOVELL Well, this is going to help you, I think. This is a new album that’s going to be released on November 1st, and it’s a compilation of all the old lovers rock that we did in the ‘70s. FERGUS MURPHY What defines lovers rock? DENNIS BOVELL Lovers rock has to be a love song and it’s mainly female vocalists. At the time I thought of having female vocalists on my productions. Women weren’t really involved in reggae that heavily unless they were backing vocalists for a male singer. It’s true to say that there was and still is Marcia Griffiths from I-Threes and Rita Marley and Judy Mowatt, they were three great singers, but they were still relegated to second division when Bob Marley was singing. Because it was a man’s world, girls were shoved to the side, in the background. I thought, ‘Well, Aretha Franklin is the queen of soul, why haven’t we got a queen of reggae?’ And a lot of young girls in London fancied themselves as the vocalist, upfront, throwing it down. So we held auditions at the recording studio every Sunday where anyone could come down and try out to make a record, because we were about to make a new record label, and it was going to be lovers. Because at that time it was roots rock, and there was steppers, and this was all macho music, really macho, all rastafari and all that. Women were being shoved to third division. So we wanted to bring them to the front. So we formed this label called Lovers Rock. And the first tune was called “I’m In Love With A Dreadlocks.” FERGUS MURPHY Why the name Lovers Rock? DENNIS BOVELL Well, Augustus Pablo, who I love very much, had a song called “Lovers Rock,” which I thought was a great title. Reggae was constantly changing its name ‘cause a new beat would come out and then suddenly... Before it was reggae, it would’ve been ska and then it was rocksteady and then it arrived at reggae, where it stayed for a long time. Then the fractions of reggae would come up, there would be steppers, which would be that kind of disco beat [beats foot on floor], then there’d be the one-drop, where the kickdrum would land on the third beat of the bar [imitates one-drop beat], all these different styles. So we felt we’re going to have this music called lovers rock and it’s going to be music for dancing to, call it smooch reggae if you like, where couples can get hold of someone and turn the lights out and get busy there [laughter]. It was a purely a sexual thing [laughter], we wanted to [adopts earnest voice] ‘be at one with the women,’ yeah? FERGUS MURPHY Not with jah? [laughter] DENNIS BOVELL I had a big soundsystem, called Sufferer’s Hi-Fi, we played music for women because a lot of the hardcore rasta stuff seemed sexist. So a lot of the girls wouldn’t go those dances, they’d go where they could hear some soul, some soft music. And, you know, where the girls were, the guys would definitely be there [laughter]. So we catered for the ladies and then the guys just came. FERGUS MURPHY It’s always the same. [laughter] DENNIS BOVELL “We’re sold out, we’re sold out.” [laughter] So, from that Augustus Pablo song called “Lovers Rock” I decided that the two words went together well to be the term for this new hybrid of London-based reggae and couples-dancing style, it wasn’t hard and it was all about love. And it was rocking as well, lovers rock. Sade came and used my title, I don’t know who she paid... And the guitar player and my great friend John Kpiaye, we’ve been playing together now since 1975, he wrote a lot of songs in that vein, as we all did. We were trying to write a lot of love songs and convert them to a nice reggae beat. And he wrote the classic song “I’m in Love with a Dreadlocks” and these three girls came down intending to be three solo singers, but we decided they should get together and be The Supremes of reggae and they were called Brown Sugar. One of them, her name was Caron Wheeler... AUDIENCE MEMBER DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, she was 15 at the time and we cut the first record with her. There she is, in fact, and this album’s going to be out next month to commemorate the whole lovers rock movement, because once we started it, everyone was on the wagon. FERGUS MURPHY It was worldwide, wasn’t it? DENNIS BOVELL Worldwide. This label was called the Lovers Rock label. The owner of this label was a guy called Dennis Harris, who’s now passed away. And his son, Peter, who’s the boss of a record company called Kickin’, they put out records by Blaze and people like that. Kickin’ is more house and old school and jazz rock ’cause his dad made reggae, so he didn’t want to do that. Then suddenly I met him and he unfortunately didn’t know his dad as well as I did, because I was the engineer in his dad’s studio, so I spent a lot of time with his dad. AUDIENCE MEMBER He was a real Jamaican? DENNIS BOVELL He was a real Jamaican guy, yeah. I worked for him for six to eight years, we cut a lot of tunes. I was trying to tell Peter about his father and the records we used to make. And a lot of the tapes, I had them anyway, so we put together this lovers rock tribute and it’s called Lovers Rock Story. AUDIENCE MEMBER So by that time you dropped all these political songs and went to love? DENNIS BOVELL I hadn’t dropped the political songs. I had a multi-life going on, because in one part I was working with my band Matumbi, in another I’m working with my soundsystem, Sufferer’s Hi-Fi, then my job is as a sound engineer in a recording studio where I’m doing work that people want me to do. And at the same time we’re trying to invent a new style to try and make a name for ourselves, to become famous. So I’m doing all those things at the same time as beginning to work with the poet Linton Kwesi Johnson. This is the man who made me give up the lovers style, because how many love songs can you sing? And he’s made seven albums and never said, “Baby” [laughter], never said, “I love you.” Insurrection and stuff he’s talking about, and how bad the police are. Well, we all know that. I hadn’t given up, I was just pursuing other means of trying to make a buck. So, OK, this is Brown Sugar - “I’m In Love with a Dreadlocks.” (music: Brown Sugar - “I’m In Love With A Dreadlocks” / applause) That was the first song that Caron Wheeler sang, aged 15. About the same time I had a bet with Dennis Harris in the studio. We had this rhythm track, I said, “We should write a new tune right now.” He said, “Yeah, I’ll bet you £100.” “Put the money on the table, put the money on the table.” So he put it on the table, I got my pen out and went [imitates writing very fast]. He said, “Who’s gonna sing it?” “I am.” That’s another £100. “Who’s gonna do the backing vocals?” “I am.” That’s another £100. He’s going, “Nah, nah, you can’t do that.” I said, “Put the money on the table.” And I did this tune. (music: Dennis Bovell - unknown / applause) FERGUS MURPHY Lovers rock with a P-funk flavour. DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, well, Kool & The Gang and P-funk, my father had all these kinds of records at home, so we’d listen to that and try to incorporate stuff like The Temptations or Otis Redding, who was the great love song singer. In fact, that synthesizer was called the ARP and it was a brand new synthesizer and not many people could get their hands on one, so we used it in a song. AUDIENCE MEMBER Let’s talk a bit about arrangements in reggae music. For me, reggae has too much bass in the groove. DENNIS BOVELL Too much bass in the groove? You can’t get too much of that (loud applause / laughter). AUDIENCE MEMBER Weren’t there strong Motown influences in the sound? Because I listen to reggae and I feel a lot of James Jamerson influences. DENNIS BOVELL A lot of Jaco Pastorius influences in reggae. Jaco used to go to Jamaica and get out of his head and play on a lot of tunes. A lot of tunes that people don’t even know it was Jaco playing those basslines there. Also, the bass player from Booker T & the MGs. AUDIENCE MEMBER I don’t know them, but I know the name. DENNIS BOVELL Booker T and the MGs , their most famous song is called “Green Onions.” [imitates Green Onions] Now, what happened was these guys were on holiday and heard a song called “The Liquidator,” [imitates “The Liquidator”] then when they were back in America they were doing a session with the Staples Singers and the bass player said, “I heard this lick in Jamaica, let’s do a song around it.” All of a sudden that song comes out [sings Staples Singers “If You’re Ready, Come Go With Me”], leaning on that bassline. Bass has always been the top line in reggae. What made a new reggae tune wasn’t what the guy was singing, but what the bass player was playing, because it was so minimal that a lot of reggae tunes were just two chords. So how many different basslines can you play on two chords to make it someone else’s song? AUDIENCE MEMBER Basslines are very independent, just like Motown classics, there are a lot of octaves in there. DENNIS BOVELL What was his name, Donald Duck? Donald Dunn, yeah. He was one of the greatest bass players that never got famous, although a lot of his licks have been incorporated into other peoples’ things. Donald Dunn, but they used to call him ‘Duck,’ he was the bass player for Booker T. & The MG’s. AUDIENCE MEMBER And the Blues Brothers too. DENNIS BOVELL And the Blues Brothers too. This man knows his thing (laughter). Him and Steve Cropper, the guitar player, and he, if you listen to a lot of Otis Redding tunes, he’s just going [imitates rhythm guitar, which then speeds up]. AUDIENCE MEMBER In a lot of reggae, the guitar just sounds like a percussion instrument. DENNIS BOVELL Well, yeah, that’s the idea, to play percussively. And that’s coming directly out of R&B. Steve Cropper invented that style of play. When Otis Redding was huge, that was the style of guitar play. If you have a chance to listen to all the Stax, there’s some CDs out, 9-CD box set with 240 hits of Stax. You’ll see reggae started off emulating that and then people like me tried to take it another way and put some other elements in it; times changing, other styles are coming in, melodies like Beatles harmonies and that kind of thing; Original Five Blind Boys, doo wop harmonies and then later on hard rock sounds, synthesizers, fuzz guitars. AUDIENCE MEMBER Another thing is how faithfully Soul II Soul incorporated that sound in their early recordings like [“Keep on Moving.”] DENNIS BOVELL Being brought up in London we were exposed to a lot of pop as well as rock, as well as trying to cypher through a lot of American garage, because the Americans don’t just make one or two records, they make 1 or 200,000 and throw them all at you. And you try and pick out of that the elements that we liked most about anyone and fuse them together and hopefully come up with a taste that satisfied us, and hopefully other people would try to emulate as well. Soul II Soul was a soundsystem before they did stuff like “Keep On Moving,” and when Caron became the singer, I knew it would be successful. Because after we did a bunch of reggae stuff with her, a friend of mine called Bill Farley and an Italian called Fabrizio – I can’t remember his second name now – but in the early ’80s we used to do disco with Caron singing, although I can’t remember what name she used. She was already Caron Wheeler in the reggae world, so for the funk world we had to give her another name. None of those records were hugely successful, but that’s just given me another idea, maybe I should get those records and put them on a compilation for future generations. FERGUS MURPHY We’re just hitting the early ’80s and lovers rock and you mentioned that you were wearing many different hats. You were obviously very well-known all around the world for your work with Linton Kwesi Johnson and this album Bass Culture, apart from lending its name to books and things, am I right in thinking it was one of the biggest selling reggae albums in the world until the Bob Marley compilation came out? DENNIS BOVELL That’s right, for Island Records. FERGUS MURPHY Obviously, an album that travelled all round the world. DENNIS BOVELL Definitely. FERGUS MURPHY I’m going to play something off this. (music: Linton Kwesi Johnson - “Street 66” / applause) DENNIS BOVELL This song in many ways was the beginning of sampling for us. I’d done, on the previous record, a song called “Sonny’s Lettah,” which was a poem written from a boy in prison in England to his mother in the Caribbean explaining how he finds himself in jail with his younger brother, because the older brother has killed a policeman while being falsely accused of something. And on that track I had a harp player called Julius Finn, whose real name is Augustus Arnold, who’s from Chicago and the brother of Billy Boy Arnold, a great harp player and the harp player for Muddy Waters. Julius also played with Archie Shepp and people like that. I needed some more harp for this song, but he wasn’t around. So I went back to “Sonny’s Lettah” and took a sample of the harp from that song and with the aid of a broomstick and a vari-speed... you may ask yourself how did a broomstick get in there. Well, the broomstick was the means of keeping the tension on the loop of tape that I’d made. I got a loop of quarter-inch tape and made several notes [imitates notes rising in scale] and with the aid of the vari-speed I could vary it in tune. So because he wasn’t there, I put that loop on the tape recorder and while the master was going, just feed it back in and stretch it a little bit there and get the broomstick to keep the tension on the tape and spin it back in. And Linton was like, “How did you get the harp player on? He’s gone back to Chicago again.” Tricks of the trade. [laughter / applause] FERGUS MURPHY That’s obviously a very different sound from the lovers rock feeling. When you hear that you forget about the other stuff, this is menacing, dark. DENNIS BOVELL Well, what happened to me during that time. One night, Friday the 13th of October 1974, what we call Black Friday, I was playing my soundsystem in the Carib Club. Now on Friday nights, I had two gigs, an early one in the Metro Club in Ladbroke Grove, the same area where they have the carnival. I’d play there from 7 to 11, then I’d go to another club in Cricklewood till 6 in the morning, the Carib Club. And on this day Lee ‘Scratch’ Perry, the Upsetter, had come to London and I’d gone to meet him at the airport to pick up a pile of fresh dubplates that he’d brought from Jamaica. I was anxious to get hold of these before anyone else because I was playing that night in a competition against another soundsystem called Lord Koos and another called Count Nick’s, it was a soundclash. Usually, it would just be two soundsystems against each other, but this was the start of a three soundclash where I was the champion, I was battling against two other sounds now instead of just one. At that time Johnny Clarke was doing his first tour of the UK and my band Matumbi was the backing band for his tour. His producer, Bunny Lee, was in town and he had a batch of dubplates, and of course, when you have them you’re not going to sell them to just one soundsystem, you’re going to sell it to as many as you can. So he was selling Johnny Clarke dubplates, Cornell Campbell dubplates, a song called “The Gorgon,” which was famous at the time. Now the other sound was a friend of Bunny Lee and he had those dubplates and I got them because my band was backing Johnny Clarke. But I went to meet Lee ‘Scratch’ Perry because I knew he had some dubplates and I thought, “Just give me the exclusive one for tonight, you can sell them to who you want tomorrow, but tonight I wanna be the first play on it. I’m gonna be the means by which London first heard these dubplates.” So, we’re on the dance, and when the time came for me play them the crowd was “Whaaaa!“ proclaiming me the champion. At the same time some policemen had entered the club and were leaving with a prisoner they’d arrested in the toilets, six policemen and one prisoner. At the same time I was playing this dubplate the crowd decided to seize the prisoner off the police. So they freed that guy and a few policemen got a few slaps and one of them got stabbed. All hell broke loose because the police came back with about 500 more and beat nearly everybody in the club. It was on the third floor and no elevator, so you had to go down six flights of stairs. And as you came out there was two policemen on every stair, hitting people, kicking people and arresting as many as they liked. The next morning I went to Ladbroke Grove and people were going, “Whoa, what you doing here?” “What you mean?” “The police are looking for you, man.” “Why?” The police were asking everyone at the station, “Who is the DJ of Sufferer’s Hi-Fi? We want to get the DJ because he put the record on, he’s the one who got the microphone and said, ‘Kill the cops.’” Nothing like that ever happened, I promise you on my mother’s life, on my children’s life, I never said, “Kill the cops.” So I went to the police station and said, “I heard you’re looking for me,” and they said, “Yeah, come on inside.” So I went in and they interrogated me for eight hours or so, asking what I’d said, what did I do to cause it all. And they laid it all at my door, said I’d started all that trouble. As a result I was charged with causing an affray, which in short means inciting a riot. So I’m in the Old Bailey, the court where they charge real murderers and shit, in court number one, the highest court, and I’m charged with being the ringleader of a gang of 12 people who I’ve never met before. They’re my gang and we beat up policemen in clubs. The trial lasted six months, every day I’m in the Old Bailey from ten to four trying to defend myself against the accusations. At the end of the trial, nine were acquitted, but on three there was a hung jury, where they can’t decide one way or another, and I was one of those three. I thought in British law a person is innocent until proved guilty. You haven’t proved me guilty so I must be innocent, you’ve got to let me go. But no, the judge said, “We’re going to retry you,” so I had a retrial, started all over again from top to bottom. This lasted three months, nine months altogether with the two trials. At the end of the retrial at 12 noon the jury went to decide, by nine at night they still hadn’t decided. So the judge said, “If they don’t decide by ten we’re going to throw it out, we can’t try you three times.” At five to ten, the jury came back and said, “Ten of us think he’s guilty, two think not guilty.” The judge said, “That’s good enough for me – three years in jail.” That was the first time I’d ever been into a police station even. I always used to think when people said, “The police fitted me up, I didn’t do it,” that they must have done something. But here I was now in the same chair, being accused and being innocent but being found guilty and getting three years. But I didn’t give up. I went to jail and while I was in there – I was in for six months of that three year sentence – I appealed to a higher court. After two sessions of listening to the case, the appeal judge said, “This guy should never even have been charged with that, there’s no evidence. Let him go.” So they let me go that day, I was free, I was on the news, I was a big star and my band was going to be in the charts next week [laughter / applause]. So Linton Kwesi Johnson came to me and said, “I want to do some music with my poetry.” I was like, “Whenever you’re ready, dude. I know what you’re saying, I know how true it is, man. Let’s get in that studio.” Richard Branson gave us some money and we went in the studio and cut LKJ’s first album, called Poet & The Roots on Virgin. We cut it in three days, the whole album, top to bottom. So our marriage has been made, and we’ve been working together 25 years now and we just brought out a new DVD, Live In Paris. FERGUS MURPHY How does the relationship work, the writing and the music? DENNIS BOVELL In the beginning Linton would come to me with the poem and the bassline, and he’d say, “I want you to play this,” [imitates bassline] ’cause that’s what he could hear in his head to go with his words. Then I’d play it until I got bored, change it a little bit, and sometimes he’d like it, sometimes he’d say, “Oh no, don’t change it.” Sometimes I’d take it real far out, depending on whether he’d let me change it at all, and we’d go in the studio and do it like that. Then, after a while I thought, ‘You got a bass mind, so let me teach you how to play the guitar.’ So I became his teacher, I showed him some exercises to improve his fingers. Then one day he came back to me and said, “You know that exercise you showed me? I wrote a song.” From then on I’d let him go into the studio with a bass and a metronome and get him to put down what he was feeling with the poem, and that way he couldn’t blame me for not getting it right. ’Cause sometimes he’d say, (imitates bassline), and I’d go, (imitates same bassline). He’d go, “No, that’s not what I want.” “So here, here’s the bass, here’s the notes, show me what note you’re hearing in your head.” We’d have these conversations all the time, just him and me. We’d thrash it out, and then he’d say he needed an introduction. So for a poem like “Unfinished Revolution,” I had this choir in my head, like I was in church (imitates sound of church organ). He said, “Did you dream that you died? ’Cause that music sounds like music to a funeral.” “No, it goes with the song, the ‘Unfinished Revolution.’” So we’d take a break and I’d come back with that theme, then I’d be the one who comes up with the bridge part. FERGUS MURPHY According to this book I’ve been reading, Bass Culture, dub poetry was the first occasion of music originating away from Jamaica and then going back to Jamaica and having an influence. DENNIS BOVELL While Bob Marley was alive, he’d signed us to his Tuff Gong label, but he passed away before he put any records out. Steel Pulse and Linton were signed to his label. I was the first person to take Steel Pulse into a recording studio. They won a talent competition, for which first prize was a day in the studio with me, and I produced a bunch of their singles in the beginning. FERGUS MURPHY You explained to me earlier that this album [indicates Linton Kwesi Johnson's Making History] was the first of those with Linton where you took control of everything. Up till then Linton had a habit of getting his friends on drums. DENNIS BOVELL And stuff, yeah. We’d go into the studio with two or three of everything and me being the spare part. We’d have two drummers, two bass players, three guitar players, four keyboard players. It’s like picking the team. “This one you play bass, you play drums, you play keyboards and you play guitar. This isn’t working, we need to change the bass player, we need to change the drummer.” And musicians would be sitting there waiting to go on saying, “I could do that better than him, let me at it, let me at it.” And it was a competition between the musicians to do their best for the project. So that worked for a while until the music exhausted its two chord, one chord, and it had to go a bit more orchestral. Some of these people were just old friends of Linton who used to go to school with him and he’d thought, ‘They’re as good as anybody else. There’s lots of people on TV who don’t even play their instruments, miming, these are my friends, give them a chance.‘ But my patience had worn thin by the time we made this album and also I’d formed a band called the Dub Band, ’cause I’d made an album in 1980 called Brain Damage and I needed to put this band together to go and perform this music. [someone holds up album] Oh wow, this guy’s on it, that’s the album. FERGUS MURPHY It’s a teacher, that’s you on the cover. DENNIS BOVELL That’s in my beard and dreadlock days. Linton, who meanwhile had been touring with a tape recorder, because once we did the stuff in the studio, we’d just make a backing track minus his voice so he could go out and gig. And he’d go out and gig with John Lydon, Public Image, and he’d open the show for them just using tapes and people would go, “Whuurr, get off!” And he said, “I can’t do it anymore, I can’t play in a stadium with 20,000 people and a tape recorder.” So I taught my band his songs and we set out to tour Scandinavia, Sweden, Iceland, just to kind of tune it up and put it all together, and it went down really, really well. So from then on, we were the band on the road, and when it came to making this album I said, “You’re not gonna get those old boys in, no way, the band’s tuned now.” So he let me do that. FERGUS MURPHY Pick a tune for us from this album. DENNIS BOVELL Let me see now, “Wat About Di Working Class.” This is a song, a poem, for working class people. (music: Linton Kwesi Johnson - “Wat About Di Working Class”/ applause) That was a chance to show off the band. We don’t just play reggae, we play music. In that poem, Linton’s drawing reference to the tanks that were rolling in Gdansk in Poland to the ordinary working class man in the street. He’s saying, “From England to Poland, every step across the ocean, the ruling classes are in a mess. The Soviet Union’s in disarray, so’s America, has been for years, the British system ain’t working, so who’s fault is it? Well, don’t blame it on the blacks, racist, blame it on your boss. Blame it on your past. We suffered the loss, we paid the cost. And we’re not gonna forget what you did to us.” FERGUS MURPHY Incredible writer. DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, man. FERGUS MURPHY We could go on and on and on. DENNIS BOVELL We don’t want to bore you. FERGUS MURPHY I don’t think there’s any chance of that. A lot of people here are involved in producing music, and we had Bernard Purdie in here last week talking about funk and soul. But a lot of people struggle with writing the bassline. Obviously, you’ve spent a lot of time doing that, maybe you don’t want to give away your secrets. Could you maybe show us something that might be useful? How would you go about writing the bassline? DENNIS BOVELL I think the chord structure determines where you can and can’t go. The top line, the melody will constrain you as well, unless you want to directly oppose what’s going on. With bass playing, sometimes less is more. That whole feeling with the bass being there, then suddenly not being there, then being there again, can give you that kind of space, the groove to let other people come through, the choice of note in the chord. Say, your guitar is playing six notes in the chord, anyone of those could be the bass note. It will change whether the chord is on its head or its feet, but it won’t change the chord, it’ll be contained in that chord. So, quite often between thirds and fifths, sixes and nines is where the tastiest melodies inside the note are contained. My favourite bass player after Jaco Pastorius is Aston ‘Family Man’ Barrett from The Wailers. I like the way he lays back and let’s the chord go. And when that chord isn’t there anymore and you’ve got something else, then he gives you a taste of what the chord before was. He can still be a part of the new chord, it’s about linking chords together and aiding the melody and being minimalist. There’s been tunes where someone said, “OK, you’re gonna play the bass on this tune.” And I’d say, “I can only hear one note. Just play [imitates bass guitar playing one note] and all the chords are going everywhere and I’m just staying right here.” It’s like holding a big kite that’s flying, I’m about to take off in a minute. And reggae is famous for doing things like that, playing two chords but a thousand million different basslines around them. AUDIENCE MEMBER They say that you know you’re a good player, if you can play just one note. DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, I agree, Duke Ellington said that. There’s a piece of Linton’s and it’s called “Sonny’s Lettah,” and he often likes to have contrasting lines, where the same thing is playing an octave up and an octave down [plays bass]. Another line of Linton’s is “Reggae Fi Peach”. Blair Peach was a schoolteacher from New Zealand, came to England and was involved in an anti-fascist march in Southall in England where he lost his life. He was hit on the head by a policeman with a truncheon and at the time the pathologist had said the dent in his head could only have been made by a police truncheon. But that’s as far as they went, they didn’t say this particular policeman had killed him. But a policeman had killed him and Linton wrote a poem about it, and the lyrics went, “Everywhere mi go, mi hear people seh, everywhere mi go, it’s the talk of the day, that the SPG is a murderer, murderer, we can’t let them go no further, cah them kill Blair Peach the teacher, them kill Blair Peach the dirty murderers.” I thought, ‘Linton, this is death, you put that out, they’re going to come for you next.’ Britain’s had a history where we don’t give policemen guns because they tend to kill people when you do that. The ordinary policeman in the street has a radio and he calls somebody, who has a gun, if he needs help and he doesn’t have one himself. And I think that’s quite a civilized move. But then you have the SPG, the Special Patrol Group, and those guys had guns and they’d be on the street corner harassing people, especially in Brixton. And it was that paramilitary section of the police force that had killed that guy and it resulted in them having their guns confiscated. So I said, “Linton, if you make this poem and say something bad about these guys they’re going to come ’round your house and take you away, we’ll never see you again.” He said, “I don’t care, I’m going to make this poem.” I said, “I’ll help you but don’t put my name on the record.” So he did it, we did it, the record come out and my name’s on the record! [shouting] “I said don’t put my name on it. I’ve just been released from causing an affray, inciting people to kill policemen and shit, and now you’ve brought me right back in there.” He said, [very calm voice] “We did it together, and I think you should be proud we did it together, and if I’m going down you’re coming with me.” [laughter] The bassline was very strange [plays bass to “Reggae Fi Peach”]. It’s just one note, and that’s Linton going, [plays more bass to “Reggae Fi Peach”] “Yeah, the police killed that guy.” And I’m going, “Oh, man!” [laughter] Then 15 years later, I’m watching TV, news item, “The police have just paid compensation to that guy’s wife for having killed him.” It took them that long to hand over some cash and admit it. But I’m thinking Linton should write another poem saying we want the guy who did it. It can be accapella. [inaudible shout from audience] He’ll find a way! I had a letter in the post saying, “Thank you for joining the ANC.” I never joined the ANC. I told Linton. He said, “I did that. Now you’re remembered!” “You could’ve asked me, I wouldn’t have objected.” He joined me without telling me. He’s gone, “Yeah, you should be a member of that.” But he’s my man. FERGUS MURPHY It’s time to hand it over. Any questions? AUDIENCE MEMBER Can you tell us something about the recording process in reggae and dub. It’s a very clean sound, a lot of delay sometimes, can you tell us something more about that? DENNIS BOVELL I’ve made three volumes now of LKJ In Dub. It stems from the actual work, but everyone’s out of the studio. I’m in there alone and I wanna mash it up, show as little respect as possible to any one instrument. With dub, nothing’s important, nothing is untouchable, nothing deserves the right to be there for any amount of time. So I’m putting things out, in, out, in, out. Before I used to have go [moves hands to imitate moving knobs], now with a computer I can write at what point something’s not there, at what point it’s louder than something else, at what point it’s there but right down there. At what point it has a double-time echo, at what point it has a half-time echo, at what point it ceases to sound like something sounded on the original track. At what point do I take the bass frequency away from the bass and make it all trebly, at what point do I do that to the snare drum, at what point do I do that to the hi-hat. I decide. And when I think that’s good enough, that’s it, next! It’s all to do with the person who’s creating it. Whatever you do, it’s dub. If it’s received well, is another matter. But whatever you do, whatever you don’t do, it’s dub. With the dancehall and that stuff, that’s not live playing, it’s machines. So that’s easier to cut holes in it. It’s going to be here for two beats here, four beats there, the whole bar there. We don’t want to hear it again for another eight bars, then bring it back in. This is the chorus, that’s got to be featured. Take all the other instruments away at the chorus, just add the vocals and the harmonies. Whatever you can throw in, whatever seems to fit the part. AUDIENCE MEMBER Was there any resistance from Jamaican musicians to accepting English musicians? DENNIS BOVELL Yeah, you’re not joking! The whole idea behind me and my friends making music in London was because in the beginning soundsystems were prejudiced against reggae that was not Jamaican-made. If it wasn’t made in Jamaica, it was inferior. A lot of guys would grab the microphone and say, “We don’t play non-Jamaican reggae,” and put it down. But because I was straddling two borders, I was in the soundsystem world and in the live music world, I was able to make records that fooled ’em all. I’d never seen a Jamaican tape recorder or console, I never heard that Jamaicans made tape. They made music, but all the equipment was made in England or America or somewhere. So it depends on you knowing how to use that stuff and get the same results or better. So I formed this group called the 4th Street Orchestra with no information about who was playing what, what the songs were called. It would be a white label. You like the record? Buy it. It would say ‘Made In Jamaica’ on the side. Mind you, there were songs done in London that weren’t up to it on the engineering side, the playing side. But there were some that were as good, if not better. To cut down this prejudice I made the Rama label and did stuff as if it was coming from Jamaica. And nobody knew who it was, you either liked it or you didn’t. And it sold, so I disproved the fact that you had to go to Jamaica to get a particular sound. Also, our 7" singles, the 45s, if it was made in London it would have a tiny hole in the centre, but if was an import you had a great big hole and had to get a middle to play the record. So I pressed the records in London and bought a machine called a dinking machine to make a big hole in it. You take it to the store and say, “Import.” They go, “Yeah, slurp!” Lap it all up. It looked like an import! Then later on, everyone goes, [adopts accusing voice] “You did those in London.” I could manufacture in London for less cost, sell for the price of an import for more profit. Trying to make some money. AUDIENCE MEMBER When Bob Marley started making records with Chris Blackwell and they had that cleaner sound, did he encounter the same resistance, people saying, “It’s not reggae ’cause it’s got an American guitarist?” DENNIS BOVELL No, ’cause that was Bob, anything Bob did was accepted [imitates applause]. A lot of Jamaican studios up to that point had good sound, but they only had four tracks, or up to 16 tracks. The more you bounce stuff around the quality goes, the treble end goes, it gets woolly, you’re bouncing on analogue tape. So you had to have more facility, so it made sense either to go America or to London or anywhere, but Jamaica where they didn’t have as much as a 16 track recorder. By recording in London Bob was able to have much more scope with the multitracking, which meant he could put much more on the tape. A lot of the recordings in Dynamic Studio, for instance, in Jamaica you’d have the drums and bass on the same track ’cause they didn’t have room; and then a bunch of rhythm instruments on another track – the guitar, the piano, the organ, all that lot on one track mono. Lee Perry had a three track machine and he was king of the jungle, he had three tracks. Then when it went up to eight tracks, then Dynamic went to 16, then to 24, but Bob wanted to experiment with hard rock guitars. I mean, you listen to “Concrete Jungle,” you know, he was going some place else. Also, the producer had a lot to do with it, Karl Pitterson and the influence of meeting John Williams and people like that, who were signed to Island as rock artists, Nazareth and Free and those guys, and he had the chance to meet them and get them to put some of their feel into reggae. An old album of his was Soul Rebel, where he’s singing old soul tunes, even “Go Tell it on the Mountain,” which is an old church song. So yeah, he probably had some opposition, but that faded away because he’d made a better move for the movement. FERGUS MURPHY We could go all day, but just a last thing before we wind up, something I didn’t realise until we met last night is that you’re somewhat of an honorary Italian. DENNIS BOVELL [laughter] I was in a film that was out in Italy about four years ago, called South Side Story by the director Roberto Torre. I was invited to be the musical director of the film. I’d been producing Hortablo Paglione and the singer Roberto Rondelli, who’s a great friend of mine, was going to play the lead in this film and I went to do to the music, and once we’d done the music, I was invited to be one of the actors. So they dressed me up different, and I made it to the end [laughs]. FERGUS MURPHY And you’ve produced a lot of Italian reggae. DENNIS BOVELL I worked with 99 Posse, Balapudiva, Pepe Barra, Lele Carraciolo, few other people. FERGUS MURPHY What is it like for an Italian reggae, or a reggae scene in any country for that matter to try and gain respect? DENNIS BOVELL I think the idea is to please the people at home. If you’re making reggae, don’t alienate your kin, your folk. Please the people at home then think about those outside. If you try to please everybody, you’re going to end up pleasing nobody. I done stuff in Japan with a singer called Iria, and she’d previously been a punk rock singer and a racing driver. She wanted to be a reggae singer and came to me, I thought we could do it. Let me give you an example of some Japanese reggae I made not all that long ago. She’d had a hit with a pop sound and I thought she had an interesting voice and wanted to do this album. Unfortunately, she’d had a baby and brought the baby to London and wanted the baby to sing on the record. (music: Iria - unknown / applause) »It’s been fun making reggae all around the world. In Africa, with Alpha Blondy, I made six or seven albums with him including his first album. He came to my studio in London with The Wailers. In Brazil, with O Rappa, they came to London. AUDIENCE MEMBER You haven’t talked about the influence Afrobeat had one you. DENNIS BOVELL I worked with Fela Kuti in the ’80s. I recorded about 20 titles in my studio in London with him. Afro beat taught me how to be percussive in reggae. It plays an important part in reggae. A lot of reggae bands don’t have percussionists anymore because they’re troubled people, usually [laughter], and they get drowned out by electrical things. But, yeah, Afrobeat did teach me how to percuss my reggae in a different way. And also a group called Savannah 75 from Sierra Leone and Prince Nico and a group called Nwagadudu from Liberia.

---

Title: Digital
Date: 2015-04-21
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/digital-roots-rocker/

Digital
Steve Carr began as a reggae selector in Ipswich before emerging as one of the key figures in the drum & bass movement of the late 1990s under the name Digital. In his session at the 2004 Red Bull Music Academy, Carr guides us through his early years and working with the Timeless and Metalheadz labels. He also explains the realities of running your own label and distribution, offering tips for producers looking to get their records signed and calling for individuality above all else.
Hosted by NICK DWYER Joining us now is Steve Carr, also known as Digital, Natural Mystic and many other things over the years. He’s a drum & bass producer who’s been producing for Moving Shadow, Metalheadz, 31 Records, Renegade Hardware – pretty much every major drum & bass label. We might as well get into a track so people get an initial vibe of what you’re all about. DIGITAL This is “Sound Killa” on Timeless. (music: Digital – “Sound Killa”) NICK DWYER So, Ipswich, born and bred? DIGITAL Yeah. NICK DWYER Tell us about Ipswich, where is it geographically? DIGITAL East of England, there’s a big wash bit there [gestures as if on a map], it’s north-east of London, about 70 miles away, or 130 kilometers from London. It’s a country place but there’s quite a few people living there, it’s not a little village or anything. There’s a few good pubs. It’s not some little tiny place where nothing happens, a lot of music comes out of there. In the drum & bass scene there’s been a few people, like Photek, Source Direct, Origination. Reggae bands like Jah Warriors, who used to run with Aswad back in the day. NICK DWYER Growing up in Ipswich, what music was inspiring you? DIGITAL My dad for a start, he’s been playing reggae, soca and all that for about 35 years at least. So [we had] records around all the time. I’ve got older sisters and brothers, and they’re playing soul, whatever, Depeche Mode, anything. My brother was playing hip-hop, and I’d listen to electronic music, reggae. There were loads of DJs in Ipswich, everyone’s a DJ. NICK DWYER So in the ‘80s, UK soundsystem culture played a big part? DIGITAL At first I was playing reggae, same as everybody else until rave culture came in, everyone went to the raves and left the little reggae parties, and I veered over to that. NICK DWYER Going back to the soundsystems, who was your favourite sound? DIGITAL Jamaican sounds, really. My dad had his sound, he was doing his thing, local sounds. Bodyguard, Saxon, Stone Love, people like that. NICK DWYER Did you have any experience of putting together soundsystems? DIGITAL Yeah, when I was about 18 I’d broken my finger and got loads of money and started building and messing around with speakers, frequencies, all kinds of stuff. It started from there. NICK DWYER When did you get bitten by the rave bug? DIGITAL About 1990. There’s a guy called Danny C on the drum & bass scene. I went to Colchester, took my dad’s soundsystem with me, was playing reggae with my mate YT, and he came up to me saying, “Bring your speakers up to the beach mate, there’s a party going on.” So I took my speakers up and it was great, everyone jumping around, raving, and I thought, “This is great.” The music was sort of hip-hop with reggae basslines, and I liked the two musics jelling together, I got well hooked on it. Danny C started bringing his decks around so I was practising, started doing little parties around Ipswich, drum & bass mixed with reggae. Then I started raving myself and listening to the top DJs, and around ‘93 I thought, “I’m sure I can do this music,” so I started trying with Danny C and it followed from there. NICK DWYER And your first record was out on Certificate 18? DIGITAL Yeah, ‘94, me and Danny C. NICK DWYER In terms of the path of history with UK breakbeat music, when jungle blew up it was mad, it was everywhere – The Face, i-D magazine, every single compilation was jungle mania. It must have been a really vibrant time. What are the memories like for you? DIGITAL I’m from a bit of a dodgy estate in Ipswich, a little bit racist. So I’m going to these parties and I’m seeing these racist people talk to black people and black people talk to these racists and it was bringing everyone together. That's amazing, really, and that was through music. So that was one of the most amazing things about this new jungle culture, this whole party culture. NICK DWYER Prior to that whole thing there was still a bit of segregation going on within camps? DIGITAL What, in music you mean? NICK DWYER Just in general with different races, but then this thing brought them all together? DIGITAL Yeah, you’d get these people who didn’t like reggae jumping around to all this reggae-influenced music, that was just amazing in itself. And all the reggae boys were going, “I ain’t going to them jungle raves,” and then they’d turn up. NICK DWYER At what point with your production did you realize it was serious? DIGITAL In 1994 I’d done my thing with Danny C, but in 1995 I did my first solo release on Timeless called “Spacefunk”, my first track, and people were just going mental about it and it got played for about four years. Over the first two years I thought, hold on a minute, I did that with my eyes shut, so I thought I must be able to make it worthwhile and make a career out of it. NICK DWYER All musical genres have their epicentre, be it your Paradise Garage or your Warehouse, or broken beat now has Co-Op. You had Rage at Heaven for breakbeat hardcore, a night like AWOL for jungle, but around 1996 it was all about the Blue Note. Wherever you were in the world, everyone knew about the Blue Note, so tell us about that. DIGITAL Everyone’s happy going to a big rave, that’s cool. But this was a nice small club, this is the Metalheadz thing I’m talking about. They took a soundsystem called Eskimo Noise in there. It used to smash the club up. The vibe was amazing, you’d have a hundred people outside queuing all night and everybody wanted to play there because it was so fabulous. That was a major factor in the vibe of the scene. NICK DWYER Something that was definitely ingrained with the Blue Note thing, I mean, dubplate culture has existed from way back in the Jamaican scene, but the Blue Note really personified that whole thing, that’s where you’d go to hear Grooverider play the freshest tunes. DIGITAL If someone was playing Blue Note there’s no doubt they’d be phoning you up the day before, “You got any dubplates?” Everyone wanted to represent there, that was the place. NICK DWYER And you always had to come with fresh stuff? DIGITAL Well, that was just the vibe. Everyone wanted to play fresh [stuff], but there was a vibe that was just amazing. NICK DWYER How did your link up with Metalheadz come about, ‘cause you did that track “Down Under,” and “Niagara”. DIGITAL I’d done a track called “Touch Me” on Timeless in ‘96, that was getting played, that was doing well. Goldie was breakdancing to it in Speed, Fabio & LTJ Bukem’s club, and I was there and someone told him, “Yeah, it’s his track.” And he came over to me saying, “Sort me out, sort me out.” So I sent some tracks over to him and it was quite easy. If you’re making tracks that people want to sign and that people enjoy, it’s quite easy to get through. NICK DWYER You’re always doing something different with your production. It’s always very bass-heavy. What were you trying to do back then? DIGITAL I don’t think I was trying to be anyone else. I was drawing from my influences when I was younger. The first record was a bit reggae, a bit poppy, a bit Depeche Mode, and also a bit hip-hop, too. I was just drawing from my influences. And I think that’s important, because even now you get new artists trying to copy what’s going on on the scene and it becomes throwaway tracks. Everyone’s individual, and if everyone draws from their influences you’ll end up making different tracks. That’s what I was doing. I didn’t think I needed to do this sort of track, that sort of track – it was from in here [points to his heart]. NICK DWYER Tell us about your relationship with Brillo at Timeless, ‘cause obviously you’ve grown with Timeless as a label. DIGITAL The first two tracks I had done solo did really well and they were on Timeless. Because I was doing well he’d ask my advice on tracks to sign. Further on in the years he was helping me out by promoting me, all I had to do was make music and he was promoting me with the label. We sort of teamed up and worked for each other. NICK DWYER Play another track for us. DIGITAL I’ll put on “Deadline,” it’s a bit mad, isn’t it? NICK DWYER There was a period for you where, all of a sudden, three or four years ago, a track like “Deadline” was just getting caned across the board. DIGITAL I think that was just me doing my own thing. There was nothing like that at the time. The leaders at the time were Ed Rush and Optical, and it was very techno. Originally, I think drum & bass was a bit reggae-influenced, a lot of soul, quite happy music. Then you’d get girls leaving the clubs. It was a bit grim in there, a lot of men in the club. This put a bit of fun back in and it did really well for me. (music: Digital – “Deadline”) NICK DWYER That was huge. All across the world that was one of the biggest dancehall tunes – six rewinds every time it got played. The drum & bass scene has always been very cyclical. In the mid-90s you had Bukem and Good Looking, that whole sound, then that was out, it became too coffee table, then it was all about techstep. As you say it got very techno – were you not feeling the scene so much in that period? DIGITAL Nah, a few tracks before that, me and the Spirit guys were like, “What’s going on here? Let’s go and get jobs or something.” NICK DWYER Seriously? DIGITAL Yeah, I’m a reggae man, you know what I mean? I like a bit of jazz, a bit of soul in my music, and that wasn’t doing it for me, and that was just [makes unpleasant noise], all this noise. It wasn’t happening for me. We [Digital & Spirit] had done a track called “Phantom Force” that swept all that crap away. NICK DWYER It wasn’t just you. One that comes to mind is Photek. During that time he was the man, the big programming whiz, then all of a sudden someone who was so prevalent just went, “That’s it, I’m not feeling it.” DIGITAL Same again, he likes soul in his music. You’d be playing to 35 men in the club! It’s not happening, is it? It’s not fun. NICK DWYER When you were making “Deadline” what was going through your head? DIGITAL First of all, I got the drums, thought these are interesting, bit African sounding, and I just wanted to make some happy tune that people could jump around and enjoy themselves to rather than nodding their head and looking upset about something. NICK DWYER You never had your own label in the ‘90s, but part of Timeless became a label called Function, which you were overseeing. What were you trying to achieve with it? DIGITAL I just wanted to show people that you can do their own thing and get away with it, ‘cause everyone was copying everyone. That label was for me to just float around on, not worry about doing this or that. There was big tracks on there, tiny tracks on there. I didn’t care, it was just music on there. NICK DWYER Who was on it, close friends or what? DIGITAL It was 75% me and close friends who enjoyed expressing themselves without looking over their shoulder and watching everyone else do their tracks and copying them. NICK DWYER For a lot of people making drum & bass outside England it always seemed like it was UK and then the rest of the world. But as well as Marky and XRS coming from Brazil, Timeless was one of the only labels looking at what was going on in the rest of the world. DIGITAL There’s established artists out there, and people play safe. We enjoy all kinds of music, no matter who does it or what style it is. Timeless releases jazzy stuff, ragga stuff, techy stuff, everything, and that’s what we like to play as well, no matter who you are or where you’re from. Like [New Zealand’s] Concord Dawn, that was a techy track [‘Tonite’/‘Appollo 13’]. They hadn’t had a UK release before, we took it on and I think it's sold about 11,000 to date. NICK DWYER I feel like I’m flying the New Zealand flag, but Concord Dawn are a couple of guys from there. You spent some time with them, they gave you a demo and you went out of your way to listen to it. DIGITAL Timeless do a label called L Plates for new artists. There’s a lot of artists going on to do big things that have come through that label. I thought, yeah, that tune is really good. This same track was getting played by DJs for about three months, but no one had snapped it up ‘cause they were new artists from New Zealand. I was talking to my partner Brillo and we said, “Let’s just put it on Timeless, this track’s really good.” Next minute, everyone was phoning up Concord Dawn asking for tracks. That’s just the scene for you, people are scared, they don’t like to do new things. NICK DWYER Why is that? DIGITAL I don’t know. Me and Brillo are relaxed people, we’re quite open... I don’t know. I really don't know why. NICK DWYER You guys are obviously always checking out demos. DIGITAL That’s the other thing. I listen to everything. The only thing that does piss me off is if someone sends me 13 tracks on one CD. Because I could get 10 [CDs], that’s 130 tracks in a week, and I’ve got a life, you know what I mean? So I say to people, “If you’re going to stay in touch with me, just send me a few tracks, and I'll listen to every track.” NICK DWYER So your advice is to just stick two or three good tracks on there. DIGITAL That’s right, because I have got a life. If you produce a lot of tracks all the time, just keep sending them every week, but it does get a lot when you’ve got 10 CDs, 10 tracks on each one. I’ve got friends, I’ve got my own work to do [laughs]. NICK DWYER Back to that thing of drum & bass being very much a UK genre, but now blowing up around the world – now you’ve got this Eastern Europe thing. Are you constantly finding new pockets? DIGITAL People hear about how we are at Timeless and they’re always sending us stuff. Not all of it’s great, but it’s really interesting to listen to. Technology is helping people all round the world to produce better stuff, and that’s really exciting. You never know what you’re gonna get sent next. NICK DWYER The other thing that Timeless has expanded into is distribution. In the last two or three years, in electronic music as a whole, we’ve had all these distributors go out. EFA, big German distributor, Prime, a techno distributor, in drum & bass the main one was Vital Distribution. A lot of people complain about DJs holding on to dubplates ‘cause they want fresh tunes, but what they don’t realize is the problem is with the distribution. DIGITAL It’s hard out there. Distributors, some of them are greedy and they try their luck with stuff they shouldn’t. They get themselves into trouble and it affects the labels, then the labels can’t release anything, can’t pay their artists advances and stuff. Next minute tracks are piling up and it gets out of hand. NICK DWYER With Vital it got very out of hand. DIGITAL Really out of hand. There was big, big money being owed at the time. It got messy. NICK DWYER £100,000 is a lot of money. Obviously, there’s Load. What’s your aim with it? DIGITAL It’s a small distribution company. Because Brillo and myself were looking after lots of people’s labels we decided to make a proper go at it. But it’s not like 50 labels and ten of them are good and 40 are rubbish. There’s only a few labels there, and it's a nice little tightly controlled thing so we can oversee everything. We’re not going to be taking everyone's label. NICK DWYER It’s very international, you’ve got people from where? DIGITAL New Zealand, America, UK, all over the place. NICK DWYER What are you guys looking for in a label? DIGITAL Not one-hit wonders, consistency. And if you’re a new label, we just want to see that you’re trying your own thing. A lot of people send us things that just sound like everything else and that doesn’t work with us. NICK DWYER Obviously, the game has changed a lot in the last few years. Are you making sure you’re just pressing the minimum amount? DIGITAL Yeah, we deal with a tight ship. If you over-press, everyone’s losing money. You have records sitting there that’ll get burnt. That’s been a problem with Vital and there’s records not being sold. Then everyone loses money, even themselves, because the label generally won’t go, “OK, there’s the £500 I owe you.” It’s just not happening. Everyone starts losing out. That’s why a lot of distributors are going down at the moment. NICK DWYER With drum & bass, maybe more than any other genre, the whole MP3 downloading thing… I mean, how much is this Soulseek and Kazaa business affecting things? DIGITAL I think a lot. A lot of drum & bass is DJ music, and if DJs can get it off the net, it’s going to affect the sales, definitely. They’re outselling Technics decks at the moment, that just says everything. NICK DWYER Even the nature of always wanting to have fresh tunes, there’ll be tunes that you’ve played and given out to a few people, and then next thing you know, two weeks later, they’re on the internet, tunes that haven’t even been released. DIGITAL Our production line has changed. Now if we give a tune out, it’s very tight. With people I’ve known for years, no one’s going to slag it over the internet. Now I’ll get it, decide what label it’s going on and get it mastered straight away. Before, we’d let it ferment a bit around the scene, let DJs play it first. Now I’d rather get it straight onto vinyl, get it out. It’s all different now. NICK DWYER It’s a bit of a shame though, that you have to think before you give a copy of your tune to someone. DIGITAL “Don’t give it out, don’t give it out.” It’s not nice, it’s not the vibe. NICK DWYER In a lot of UK bass genres, including garage, but especially drum & bass and jungle, everyone was playing dubplates. How much has that changed now? DIGITAL CDs again. It’s cheaper to buy a CD and put ten tracks on there than it is to buy five dubplates. It’s £150 or 30 pence. Say you’ve got a massive DJ in a club playing CDs, then you’re going to look at him and think, “Well, I don’t need to buy a record, I’ll play CDs as well.” NICK DWYER Does that scare you as a label owner? DIGITAL You can’t fight against it. I play CDs, vinyl and dubplates, just depends how good it sounds. If I need to go and get it mastered on a dubplate, I’ll do it. NICK DWYER In the mid to late-90s, Music House was a bit of a legendary place. Tell us about Music House. DIGITAL It’s a shame. Everyone used to go to there to cut dubplates, everyone would meet there and say hello, everyone was friends. Now you won’t even get a phone call, you won’t talk to anyone from one year to the next. Someone will get ont AOL instant messenger: “Got any tunes?” “Yeah.” You download it. “See ya. Thanks.” And that’s not a good vibe for anything, it’s like we’re all turning into computer nerds. It used to be a meeting place. There’s people releasing tracks on their label and they haven’t even met the artist. I don’t do that, I still go to meet people. I was in Hungary on the weekend to go and meet some people. But it’s just rude. People will hit me up asking for tracks when they don’t know me from Adam. I'm like, “Who the hell are you? Piss off.” NICK DWYER Is it really sad that that meet-and-greet element has gone? DIGITAL It is. Meeting people and looking at people eye to eye, it’s just normal courtesy for human beings, instead of being computer nerds. NICK DWYER The other thing with AOL instant messenger thing is tunes aren’t getting properly mastered, someone’s finishing a rough version, sending it to their mate, saying, “Don’t play it out, but see what you think.” But they’ll play it anyway, then you’ll hear something really crap… DIGITAL Crap coming through the speakers, yeah. It’s nice to master things and have it presented right when you play it out. NICK DWYER Shall we play another track? (music: Digital – “Gateman”) NICK DWYER What was going on in the studio with that one? DIGITAL All them effects are live, me playing around. I just wanted to do my own little dub type thing – bass frequencies, so when I play it out it’s just a bass-heavy piece of dub, in my own way. NICK DWYER How much has your studio set-up changed over the years? DIGITAL Not a lot. I’ve got a new Mac and all that crap, but the main feature is my Tannoy speakers, they help me get my frequencies right. I don’t like my stuff too sharp, I like it smooth, like old reggae. That [track] is a good example of it I think. I’ve got an E-mu, a Mackie outboard desk, but the main thing is the Tannoys. I wouldn’t be able to mix the way if I didn’t have those. NICK DWYER In terms of bass, we were talking to Mo about getting master lacquers done. How important is the cut for you? DIGITAL The mastering? Very important. I’m not a master, I just make tunes and try and mix it down the best I can. You just want the frequencies to be all smooth. I can only do so much in my home studio. Guys train for years to be mastering engineers, I try to leave it in their capable hands. You get what you pay for as well. NICK DWYER If you look inside the etching on a lot of records, not just drum & bass, you’ll see Simon at The Exchange or Stuart at Metropolis. Tell us about these guys, what role do they play in the scene? DIGITAL The play a big role. Simon at The Exchange, he does the harder stuff, he gives a loud cut, makes things quite distorted. You put a track of his on, it’s going to be loud. I prefer Stuart at Metropolis. He’ll smooth everything, he’s a bit more expensive, but he doesn’t distort everything and turn everything up. He’ll take out the horrible frequencies, relax the track a bit more, and he keeps the bass there as well. NICK DWYER What sort of price are you looking at for that service? DIGITAL At Metropolis, to cut a new thing is about £300, Simon at Exchange is about £180. NICK DWYER Definitely worth it? DIGITAL Definitely, it’s got to be done. NICK DWYER Bass plays a big part for you, apart from the speakers. How much time would you spend on the bassline? DIGITAL Unless I’m lucky, I’ll probably do about 20 basslines and chuck 19 away in the end. I want to get a good one. It’s never the first one. I think that one [“Gateman”] took me ages. NICK DWYER How does the production process work for you? Do you start with a sample or muck around with the bassline? DIGITAL It’s never the same, that’s why my tracks vary as well. I like drums, I like bass, I like samples, I like everything. It’s never the same, I haven’t got a formula. You listen to some artists, you know they’ve got a formula, but I haven’t. I can work with musicians, I can start off with a crusty old bongo or whatever takes my fancy. NICK DWYER As well as drum & bass there’s been a lot of stories about a reggae project. Tell us about that. DIGITAL Well, it’s a friend I’ve known for 18 years, a white guy, a reggae dancehall artist. I haven’t done much towards the project yet, but it’s nearing the end of it and I’m in the middle of a couple of tracks now. That’s dancehall, and to be honest, I like dancehall, but I prefer the older reggae. I listen to Dennis Brown, Tenor Saw, Sugar Minott, that sort of stuff. That’s why I like my bass, ‘cause they often use rhythms with fat bass in it. NICK DWYER What else is coming up? What are you working on? DIGITAL It’s ten years since I joined Timeless, so we’re doing a ten year Timeless album next year. That’s various artists who’ve been on Timeless over the years. Me personally, I’m going to go into the studio because I haven’t been much lately, I’ve been involved with distribution and all that rubbish. So I’m looking to go back to what I do, which is make music in the studio. I’m just looking to make tracks, I need to be making tracks. NICK DWYER Is it a drag sometimes when you have a really hectic DJ schedule and it’s drawing you away from being in the studio? DIGITAL Sometimes it’s hectic, sometimes it ain’t, and I like it like that. If I’ve got DJing then I’ll go and enjoy that, but if I haven’t got DJing then I’ll make loads of tracks. I’m happy either way. NICK DWYER You’ve not got software on the laptop? DIGITAL I do use a laptop, but I’ve got a life to live as well. I’m trying to calm down on the old laptop, you know, not sit with my girlfriend on the laptop. NICK DWYER In terms of samples, a lot of your tunes have old reggae samples or something. What’s the fine line between clearing the samples and not? DIGITAL I won’t use a new one, it’ll be like 25 years old, or I’ll only use little snippets. I don’t really rinse it that much. I mean, you probably can tell where come from, so that’s out of respect. NICK DWYER What are the laws of sampling like? Is it 25 years after they die or something? DIGITAL I think after 25 years you can get away with it, but I think it’s the amount of seconds, probably about four or five seconds. I’m not sure. NICK DWYER What are your favourite breaks and who are these originals by? DIGITAL The obvious one, the Amen. There’s a Paris one, I’m trying to think of an example of a track it’s on but I can’t. Amen, Paris, “Apache” by [the Incredible Bongo Band], they’re the regular ones. NICK DWYER What’s the Phantom break? DIGITAL You mean [Digital & Spirit’s] “Phantom Force”? That’s a Numatic break. To be honest I’m new school, I’m not an old jazz man. I’ll go off tracks I grew up with. Back in ‘91 there was something on Reinforced by Numatic, so I call it the Numatic break. I do have some of the old originals but I’m not really that clued up on them. NICK DWYER Do you want to play another tune? Do we have any questions at this point? Audience Member What’s the Paris break? DIGITAL Shall I play it to you? You know Goldie’s “Inner City Life?” You know the metallic break in that, that’s the Paris break. Audience Member Why do you call it the Paris break? DIGITAL It’s something to do with the artist I think, old jazz people. Like I say I’m not really clued up on the old sampling thing. I’ve got the “Amen, Brother” and the [Incredible] Bongo Band - “Apache,” and a few others. NICK DWYER How much time do you spend on a break cutting it up? DIGITAL Not long, it’s just a starting point and then mixing it right. For a whole track I can take three days to two weeks, it just depends what kind of track. DIGITAL This is one I’ve done with a friend who plays guitar. NICK DWYER So this track’s called? DIGITAL This is called “Dig It.” (music: Digital – “Dig It” Dubplate) NICK DWYER So you are still keeping the dubplate scene alive? DIGITAL I cut a few. NICK DWYER What does it take for you to cut something? DIGITAL If it’s mine [laughter]. If it’s going to be around a long time without being released, then I’ll cut it on a dubplate. Or if it’s on one of my labels. NICK DWYER Talking about drum edits and programming, there’s been a revival, a lot of people harbouring it as a new sub-genre - breakage, choppage, or what have you. What’s your take on it? DIGITAL It’s been around for ages. I don’t really... it’s just the same thing that’s been going on for ages, but there’s a group of people huddling together and making a big thing out of it, I think. NICK DWYER It’s just the same as what was happening ages ago? DIGITAL Yeah, I’ve done a few of them, some of my first tracks sound like that. I do like some of it, I’m not slagging it, but it’s nothing new. NICK DWYER There’s a lot of drum & bass labels now. Seven or eight years ago there were like nine or ten releases each week and you’d get some quality stuff. Now you’ve got all these new labels cropping up. What is your advice to someone thinking of starting a new label? DIGITAL Release some stuff on some other labels first, get your name around a little bit, unless you’re doing something totally original. It’s a bit weird when people are copying tracks and not standing out and yet they’re starting their own label. ‘Nuff respect if you’re trying to do your own thing, innovate and do something special. But it’s quite weird when people sound like someone else and they’re starting their own label. NICK DWYER Do you see a lot of that? DIGITAL Yeah and I get a lot sent. “Can I start a label at Load please? Here are the tracks.” And I think, “Well, stick some of your own influences in there, make your label personal.” There’s another label out there that’s better than you and they’ve been around for ages. If you’re gonna come up with something special and new then that’s great. Audience Member Can you tell us something about MCs on drum & bass releases? DIGITAL MCs? Audience Member How important are they? DIGITAL They’re important for the vibe. They do excite the crowd. They're not always important but I am for them, I'm not against them at all. A good MC is not going to shout all over my mix anyway. I like good MCs. I think they're good for the scene. Audience Member For example? DIGITAL Um, Rage. That's it. (Laughs) Uh, Fats. Sterling. New ones, you know. There’s a few I can think of. I’m involved with some guys in New Zealand, Salmonella Dub – they’re massive over there aren’t they? Me and the guy helped do that jazz track there, Innerheart his name is. A guy called YT, a reggae dancehall artist. My friend NJC from Ipswich, we all do a thing called Sativa Records and that is drum & bass, reggae, hip-hop, anything. We've been doing remixes for Salmonella Dub, people in England or whatever. I’m well involved in other music, yeah. Audience Member I think that often it happens that working on one main scene is a limit if you’re a musician, you’re considered just a drum & bass producer. But you’ve got the attitude to work with other music. DIGITAL I think over the years I’ve learnt that I’m a producer, not just a drum & bass producer but a producer. For example, the Salmonella Dub remix is about 125 BPM, dub-influenced, it’s not drum & bass. I got all the musicians together, all the parts and bits and bobs, and I produced it. I enjoy that. NICK DWYER What’s your vibe on working with musicians? Obviously, there’s a friend of yours playing guitar on that [“Dig It”], is that a direction you want to go in more? DIGITAL I just want to do everything. I enjoy working with people. He’s a better musician than me, I’m not a musician and I’m amazed at what musicians can do. I’m privileged to being able to produce people who actually know music. I’m not a musician but I’m producing musicians and I’m privileged to do that. Audience Member When you produce your tracks do you think of making something for people to dance or something for them just to listen to? Do you think drum & bass is a high tempo music, so it should always be for people to dance to? DIGITAL As the track’s progressing I’m starting to think either this is a something to listen to, or this is a bit ravey, this will go off. I don’t sit and think I need to something for people to go mental to in a club, but as I’m getting my parts together I sample bits and bobs and play around with noises. So as the track’s going along I realise what it’s going to be like in the end. I don’t set out to do a certain type of track – except for that track where I got a musician round, so it’s going to be that way obviously. Audience Member On the subject of the bassline, it’s a bit of an old argument but I’d like to hear your take: analogue versus digital. Obviously, nowadays there’s a whole range of plugins coming out and producers now have these cheap affordable synths, but it has cropped up during the course of the Red Bull Music Academy that for tight basslines you need that analogue sound. DIGITAL You mean an E-mu sampler or something? Audience Member No, I mean an analogue synth. You can’t use a Reactor or one of these emulators. DIGITAL I’m not sure about that. I haven’t got one of these old analogue synths. I’ve got ones on a computer, these cheap throwaway things you’re talking about, and then I’ve got an E-mu sampler. If I use the same sampled bass note and put it on my Emu sampler and test it on my speakers and then I test it on my Logic computer, the difference is major – the E-mu is miles heavier. So the synths are probably lacking in bass. I haven’t got a natural synth, but the E-mu is much more powerful, much more bottom-end. Audience Member I thought it would’ve been like a synth, like the Korg MS-10. DIGITAL I EQ. My Tannoys help me get my bass how I want it. A lot of people mix on their little speakers and their bass is not really heavy. But with the Tannoys I can sit there and I can hear properly. Audience Member So maybe to get the tight sound is down to monitors. DIGITAL I think monitors are very important. These ones [points to speakers in the room] are great and my old Tannoys are working for me. Before I had those I was happy, doing my thing. But when I got them three or four years ago, that’s when I was doing a lot of tracks with loads of bass all over the place, that’s what happened. So I think it’s the monitors. People come round and play their tracks on my monitors and the bass sounds nice and clean, nice and thin, then I’ll play my tracks on their little speakers and it’s bang-bang-bang. So the monitors are very important. Audience Member What type of Tannoys do you have? DIGITAL I’ve got the little gold monitors and I’ve got the SOM 15s. (Inaudible comments from participants) DIGITAL Oh cool, they’re nice. It takes a little while to get used to monitors. At first it sounded crap, I was like, “What’s going on here? They’re rubbish.” You can rack them properly and they’re happy. You have to get used to monitors. NICK DWYER Shall we have another tune before you go? DIGITAL These were just done on the laptop. NICK DWYER What were you using? DIGITAL Just Logic Pro, add it to a soundcard. It’s the first time I’ve done it on laptop only, I’ve only done it twice. (music: Digital – Unknown) NICK DWYER Thanks very much, Steve. Nice one.

---

Title: Dixon
Date: 2015-04-21
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/dixon-deep-impact/

Dixon
Steffen Berkhahn AKA Dixon is known for genre-bending compositions that blur the lines between house, jiggy broken beat and buttery soul. He’s Berlin forever, having held down residencies at Tresor, E-Werk, and Weekend and formerly A&Ring Jazzanova’s Sonar Kollektiv imprint. Following this he set up his own Innervisions label and worked with Georg Levin as Wahoo. Talking at the 2005 Red Bull Music Academy, Dixon explains the progression of Berlin nightlife and his own evolution across dancefloors, DJ booths and drum machines.
Hosted by Dixon I guess every DJ that started at one point I was thinking about producing music, and the other point for some people it takes two months to think about it and for others it’s like ten years or something but at one point every DJ starts to think about producing his own music because everyone thinks you can do it better. Tim Sweeney Right. Dixon On the other hand I’m running a label. It’s called Innervisions. It’s a sub-label of a German label called Sonar Kollektiv that is owned and [inaudible] running it. I’m working together with them for quite a long time now and just lately I realized I want to do a house division of this label because Sonar Kollektiv is a very open-minded label that is bringing out totally different stuff. But at some point I decided OK, for the house heads we need to make clear that there’s a sub-label and it’s bringing out only house music so if you have a new release of Innervisions, which is the name of my label, you know it’s going to be house. That’s why I started it. Tim Sweeney When did you start the label? Dixon Actually, what it is it now, four months ago so we have three releases now. Tim Sweeney Well that’s quick that you put out those releases. Dixon Since I’ve been around for ten or 12 years or something I’ve met a few people over the years that I’m constantly in contact with and there’s a friendship going on and these are producers and they have tracks that I want to bring out and we have a schedule that says that we try to bring out every month one release, which is 12 releases a year, and this makes one CD a year and I think that’s a good balance of not bringing too much out. You know there’s a lot of labels that bring out every week a record and if I like #45 and I’m listening to 46 through 51 I just don’t like the other records. And there’s a few labels that bring out two records a year and I wish they would bring out more, so I’m trying to do a balance between bringing out constantly stuff and quality stuff. Tim Sweeney Who’s on the label? Dixon I It’s Alex from Tokyo, who is a DJ that is obviously from Tokyo and he... Tim Sweeney But isn’t he from a bunch of other places? Dixon Yeah, he’s quite an interesting guy because he’s actually from France, which makes him French but he was growing up in Tokyo which gives him a very much Japanese character and now he’s living in New York, so we have like influences from all over the place, that makes him very special I would say. Then there’s this guy called Arm or Amet like other people say and there’s now coming a new [inaudible] and there’s an [inaudible] coming and myself, I’m going to release up there. Henrick Schwartz is going to bring-so a lot of house DJs that I know from over the last decade or so. Tim Sweeney How did it work with setting up your label with Sonar Kollektiv? How does that setup work and how did you get that started? Dixon Well to explain that, I’d have to say that [inaudible] is an act that is releasing music on a Munich-based label called Compost and they were quite successful from the first reason, and with this success they thought it might be a good idea to open up a label in their hometown. So if I’m bringing out music on a label in Chicago, Detroit or whatever, it’s nice, but there’s still a distance there. Ideally, you have the office that you go to and give your music to at home and you just go around the corner and you can speak to the people and you get direct opinions and you can look people in the face because over the phone it’s easier to say stupid things than straight. Tim Sweeney Right. Dixon And so I decided OK there’s a huge scene in Berlin that was still very underground at the time and because of the history of the city there was no business in Berlin, there still is no big business. When you think about German, it’s a country with a very good economy. You have basically all the companies that really make good money, you have them based in Munich or Bavaria in the south of Germany and nothing in Berlin because Berlin was and still is a city that was located in former East Germany so there was no, it was a socialism country, and companies that wanted to invest money into West Germany, they invested it in a city that was based in West Germany, not in West Berlin, which is just a little island in former Eastern Germany. So you had also all the media companies not coming to Berlin and we still have a lot of music companies in Hamburg or Munich or Cologne, and just when the wall came down in late ’80s, the companies certainly saw the chance to go to Berlin and all of a sudden you had all the music companies coming to Berlin and you had the first time in Berlin history not just an underground scene that everyone knows about and everyone loves, but you also had people from that city releasing music. When you think about the golden ’80s that everyone is speaking about in Berlin where you have all these crappy underground clubs that are really fucked up places, drugs, new wave sound, David Bowie was there. But still from this very creative scene, there’s not a lot of music out of Berlin, because there was no company there picking it really up. Of course you have some examples but in generally as a Berlin producer you always have the feeling that if you would like in Hamburg or Munich where all the companies are, you just need to do shit and still get releases, and in Berlin you have the feeling like OK whatever you do here it’s really cool but no one will make it you know? And this changed in the middle of the ’90s because the wall was down, companies were coming, Berlin was again the capital of Germany, and everyone hoped or expected that Berlin was going to be the new city in Europe so you had all the people moving to Berlin and constantly there was not just cool underground stuff happening, there was music released in Berlin. Tim Sweeney How did you get started with your label underneath Sonar Kollektiv? Dixon Getting back to just what I was thinking, you think OK we have this huge scene here in Berlin and there’s a lot of people doing stuff that we like so we just started a company in Berlin which is called Sonar Kollektiv. They basically came to me, just some DJs that were coming from the jazz scene but were highly influenced by the electronic scene in the mid-’90s so they decided OK we have a lot of knowledge in jazz and old stuff but when it comes to house music there might be someone in Berlin that has a better clue, so they came to me and asked me if I would join the company in an A&R way and it was not like I had it on paper or had a card that I could offer to people, and I didn’t have a payment or something it was just like a small company and we all liked each other and was like OK, “What do you think about that? Would you do this? And you don’t like this, why you don’t like this?” And we were, I don’t know, six or seven people and we just released music that we liked at this point, it was not like, OK you are the A&R you get 1,000 euros a month and now you do your job. Tim Sweeney Right. Dixon I think it was not even a company in the beginning, and all of this over the years there was more and more business going on and we realized OK it’s really, really cool to play on Friday and Saturday and Sunday in a club somewhere in the world. Coming back on Monday and being in the office at eight in the evening. If you really do business, other peoples don’t like that. There was a time when people was calling the office and you get constantly the information, “Yeah, he’s going to come. I don’t know when but he’s going to come.” That was not really helpful for the business. So at one point we decided, OK, we were growing up now. Actually, when we started, I think we were all like 22 or 23 or something. For all of us like the first experience in this business and after a while you decide like, “OK let’s do it proper.” You don’t want to lose the spirit of you just playing around. On the other hand you want to get the experience of like there is more than just playing around. On that point we decided, “OK, we have office times now. You’re going to come by and well, actually maybe it’s a good idea to do it really your way and be focused on it completely and start your own sub-label.” That’s what I did then. Tim Sweeney When you guys hooked up you were like a house DJ in Berlin? Is that how they like... Dixon I actually started in the techno scene in Berlin. Which is a completely different point where, scene than where Jazzanova started. I’m 29 now and I started in 1991 or something. So it was like 14 years ago. I was pretty young at this time and I was not really able to get into the clubs, actually. I always found a way to sneak in. Out of this techno scene I became more and more soulful house DJ or whatever you want to call it. House is like a big term. When I tell a taxi driver I’m a house DJ he has the completely different opinion than what I think I am. At some point Jazzanova were playing a completely jazz freestyle fusion club that was really small. I always thought, “They play music they don’t know nothing about DJing. DJing is more than just playing music. You have to have really good taste.” On the other hand they were thinking about me it’s like, “He’s this house DJ. It’s a druggie thing.” Actually they realized that I was not playing just druggie music. I was playing somehow soulful stuff. On the other hand I realized, OK, they are booking DJs that I think are kind of house DJs, so what are they doing with them? I was going over to their club to check them out actually the first time proper. Before I even entered the club one of the Jazzanova guys, Alex, came to me and pointed at me and said, “Like OK you are Dixon right?” I was like, “Yeah.” “I’m Alex from Jazzanova and we want you to do a remix.” I was like, “Uhhhhh... Yeah but I’m not really producing.” He was like, “Yeah but I know someone who is working with you, so I know you’re producing but you don’t have the guts to bring it out so we want you to do a remix for us.” I was like, “Uhhh ... Yeah, ummm ... no I think I’m not ready for this. I’m going to come by Monday in the office and we going to speak about it.” Monday came and since that, it was like six or seven years ago, I’m there every day you know. I was constantly like "OK. I can learn from you, you can learn from me. I think what you are saying is totally stupid but I convince you from what I’m saying.” There was constantly like we are coming from completely different scenes but having a feeling for similar things and like discussing about it. Tim Sweeney You were talking about the different ways of seeing a house DJ. What would be your definition of a house DJ? Dixon Well, when I started to play, not really started to play international or whatever, really playing at home in this bar around the corner or something. There was a time when you were really able to play all night long. This is basically in Berlin in 1991, 1992, 1993. You had a lot of underground clubs popping up. There was no money that you could spend on superstar DJs from all over the world. They were not so much superstar DJs like today where you think everyone is a superstar DJ. Basically the clubs gave people from the city the opportunity to play. When you play in Berlin all night means you playing form 11 to eight in the morning. You play nine hours. Even if you’re really deep into one really special feel there, within nine hours you play different stuff. Compared to today where DJs from hometowns usually are playing from the first hour before the guest DJ comes by and do maybe the last hour when everyone left already. Back in the States you really got to get the experience of playing a long set and really understanding what it means to play in front of an empty club. Which means you don’t put up the volume. You just play low level. Down tempo. Not aggressive. Coming to the point where people are there and you get the feeling of, “OK, there’s like 20 people are there and it would be nice if two people of them would dance, but no. I don’t play dance music now. If I play it now later on there’s no step higher than this.” I still really try to keep it low and I wait until really enough people are there before I pull out the dance tracks. You get experience of what it means to play all night and play the prime time and have the guts to play at four o’clock at the prime time a tune that is not a prime time tune. Because you play five more hours you have enough time to play the other records that you know they are going to work. This experience is gone today. Due to this experience, me as a DJ, I really was open-minded to different house things. There’s techy house stuff, there’s broken beat stuff, there’s vocal stuff, there’s disco stuff, there’s lots of stuff. I know DJs that are just playing one kind of it. I’m playing constantly different stuff and there’s the year 2001 where I’m really influenced by Jazzanova for instance, which means I’m playing a lot of broken beat records. There’s 2005, where I’m really influenced by a lot of techy stuff like Carl Craig, so I’m playing maybe the same tempo but a completely different feeling, different beats, different arrangements. It’s really hard to explain a house DJ because a real house DJ is for me someone who plays every kind of house. Tim Sweeney You said before you were doing the house you were playing techno. Dixon Yeah, I was playing actually drum & bass and techno. In the early ’90s, when you were playing drum & bass it was called breakbeat or jungle at this time. It was still the same tempo as house or techno. Maybe it was 5 to 10 BPM faster or whatever but with the pitch you could adjust the tempo and play different styles into one hour and people were not thinking, ‘Hey, that’s completely different music.’ Where you go today in a drum & bass club and you listen to drum & bass there. Or you go in a techno club and you going to listen to techno there. In the early ’90s, it was very close by. Even when I say I come from the techno or the drum & bass scene, it was all all a mixture of this. For instance you have Lil Louis a very famous house producer that produced “French Kiss” for instance that everyone knows. He was producing in January vocal house records and then he’s producing on 115 BPM and then the next month he was producing the acid techno track. The same person. This is gone today. You have the techno DJ. [makes chopping motion with his arm] You have the techno producer and the house producer, and the house DJ and the drum & bass and so on. Yeah I’m coming from techno scene but it was all a mesh of different styles. Tim Sweeney I read that you used to have a residency at Tresor? Right? What would you play there? For me I think of that place and it’s like banging and German dudes without their shirts on like sweaty and... Dixon You’re right, but the club was opened at this time Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday. Four different days. Obviously you had different DJs playing there different styles. Me and my partner at this time, DJ Clay, we started actually Wednesday night, which was the first house night at Tresor Club. If you’ve been to Tresor Club the club is made in a way that you have different floors and you also have an entrance that fits like 80 people or something. Maybe 50, I don’t know. We actually started in this entrance our house night there. It was summer and it was the garden around Tresor. All of a sudden there within three months or something there was like 500 people showing up. 400 outside, 100 in this really tiny space. Then it became winter. The club was thinking about doing it again, but the space was too small so they moved it to the big floor in the Tresor Club. That’s how I ended up at Tresor. It was my first really club that I was really running. Tim Sweeney How many years did do that for? Dixon Actually I did it one year. The whole idea of this was like when we started it it was summer. There was a beautiful garden around Tresor. We thought, ‘OK, it’s Wednesday night and we just want to play some music.’ Tresor offered to not take an entrance. So people just come by don’t need to think about paying an entrance. Maybe just go into the garden and don’t really enter the club or whatever. We really liked the summer thing. When it became winter, they didn’t expect that it’s going to be successful. So they thought, ‘Let’s just do it.’ But at the point that it was successful, so they said, “OK, it’s winter now. We close the garden because winter in Berlin is quite cold. We have like two bars open in the club. We offer a really good sound system we have like a VJ going on. We should take some money at the door.” They took eight German marks at the time. We thought this is not really what we wanted to do there. It became really successful but normal night. We decided, ‘No, we’re not going out there.’ This night was called Bonita House Club. It was still running, the same night without us, was still running till 2005. The Tresor Club just closed six months ago or something. It was still every Wednesday there was still like 1000 going there then because it was the only space in the city where you could go out properly on Wednesday, but without us and without house because it was techno then. Tim Sweeney Do you do a night in Berlin now? Dixon Yeah, there’s this club called Weekend, which is in the center of the city. Berlin’s not very high. There’s not like tons of skyscrapers around. It’s just a very flat city. This building is one of the few skyscrapers because it’s like 14 floors or something. The club is on the 12th floor. You have no other high buildings around. It’s 12th floor and it has windows all around. You can have a nice view over the city. You have a really good sound system. I play there every third week or once a month. It’s not really regular. Every third week or once a month or something. It’s not really regular. It’s not like I have the first Friday or Saturday, no. I do every 3 weeks or something. Tim Sweeney Is that like an Innervisions night or something? Dixon Yeah. It’s called Innercity actually. It’s basically me playing all night long on month one, and then on other months I have someone coming over that I really like. The night is, luckily enough, really successful right now. I have the feeling the house music is really coming back right now. Within Europe, the last three years were really dominated by electro and minimal, tech-house or something. Right now, really have the feeling that people are really getting back into house music, or just different stuff. My residency like two years ago was not really good, but right now it’s really good so I have the opportunity to invite people that I‘ve met over the years that maybe don’t really have a big name but I think they’re really good DJs. I can just bring them over because the night is really successful. It doesn’t matter. I don’t need to book Erick Morillo or whatever banging house DJ to fill up the club. It’s full anyway, so I can book whoever I want to. Tim Sweeney How do you think the Berlin scene has changed from back when you first started to now? Dixon I think one of the main differences of the scene in Berlin was that the people that were really doing the clubs were actually owning the spaces. At the beginning, the people that would do the parties were really doing everything there. There are a lot of empy spaces in Berlin, and people just go in there and do parties. After four months or something, the police come by and shut it down. Within this four months, the club was running good or not. If it’s not running good, you know, well it doesn’t matter. The place is shut down. If it was running good, the same people were doing the next phase, like a half year later. Maybe because it was successful in the first place, in the next space they were not just renting the sound system, they were having their own sound system, and then after the next four months the place was shut down again. After doing this three or four years, these people started to have the money to actually rent the place officially and do a proper club. Back in the days, you had really a lot of empty buildings that they just stole. Now, you have the same people, they were doing these one off parties back in the day having their own clubs. Even if the Tresor is closed now, the guy that was running it was really the guy that was running one off parties back in the day. Or, there’s another famous club in Berlin that was called WMF. In the ten year history of this club, this club was changing the venue every year. [It went] from being completely illegal to now being completely official. It’s still the same people doing it. That’s a really good thing. In other scenes where I’m going to, there’s always this point where I’m playing in this whatever club, and then the guy that booked me is introducing me to the owner of the space. There’s a 45-year-old guy that just invested money in something and doesn’t care about anything but the money. You have all these clubs in the world where people running the first Saturday and the second Saturday, it’s completely different people doing it because there is just someone behind it that owns the place, wants his money and is just renting it. In Berlin, I would say that in eight out of ten clubs the owners are really doing the parties there. That's actually really special. Even the doorkeepers are really connected to the club. Yesterday when I was playing this club, there was someone working at the door that didn’t care. He’s a security guy. He’s doing his job. Maybe he’s a nice guy, and he’s doing a good job, but he’s completely not connected to the music. If he’s saying, “OK, you have to bring down the music in five minutes,” that’s really what he wants. It’s not like in Berlin. It’s kind of like, “OK, you’re going to bring down the music in one hour or something, so I can think about how I want to end up the night.” Even if there’s a situation where, “Hey, we have to close in 10 minutes,” I’m saying, “OK. I need 15 minutes because I want to play this song as the last song to finish the night in a good way.” The guy would say, “OK, do it.” Yesterday for instance was like, “OK you have five more minutes and we have to ...” He was doing the lights to tell the people, “OK, it’s over now. You have to leave.” Something that just would never happen in Berlin. It’s kind of like people owning the space, they decide when they have to close it and the door guy works at the door. That’s his job. Even the bar guys, or girls, it’s always the same people that you see. You see people dancing in 2003 in this club, and you see them in 2005 working there and earning money there. There’s a strong connection between everyone that works in the club. It’s maybe not like a happy family but there is a connection and there’s the nightlife. It’s not like it’s just a job, like, “I need to earn money on Saturdays, I’ll work at the door in this whatever nightclub.” Tim Sweeney Do you have any other favorite DJs that are around now that you’re into? Dixon Yeah. There’s this guy called Kristian from Âme, which is on my label also. He’s really, really good DJ. I think there’s tons of DJs around. I could give you t names now. Also, there’s a DJ for every situation. Tim Sweeney Right. Dixon I mean, when I’m going out and I want to enjoy myself, I don’t want to go to a deep house DJ. I don’t want to go to a deep house club. It’s like what I’m working the studio on this music. I’m listening to it in the office. I’m playing it on the weekends, so if I’m going out, I want something else. It’s even really hard for me to have an opinion about other deep house DJs because they’re doing the same. Yes, they may be a little bit better or not so good, but I really don’t have a serious opinion about them. When I enjoy myself, I go to a techno club, or I go to a hip-hop club, or I go to a rock concert. That’s actually much more interesting. It’s not like I’m going around in my scene and I want to see the superstar DJ there and I want to have an opinion about then. No, it’s not like that. Tim Sweeney With your own productions, you have... I know you have this Wahoo thing. How did that get started? Dixon As I told you, on Sonar Kollektiv, which is the label there, there’s a lot of different music coming out there, which means there’s a lot of completely different people sending demos to Sonar Kollektiv. There was this one guy called George Levin who was sending a demo with a lot of soulful productions. Most of them down tempo but some of them up tempo. I got this demo, and I picked two of the tracks that I liked and told him to produce them properly so I can put them out. He told me, “That’s everything I can do. I have a two-track at my home and I’m playing the Rhodes, and I’m playing the bass and all this but I can’t produce it better.” I offered him to produce it for him. Out of this, we became friends, and the first two tracks were pretty successful for the label. Me as a DJ, without any music background, I was never playing piano or guitar or bass, I was just playing records. When I started to produce in the studio, I started to think about harmonies and all that. It was a perfect match with him having a musical background. I could actually tell him what I wanted to and he was playing keys on my productions. There came a point where it was not just me producing a track that he wrote or I am doing a remix project and he’s playing some keys for me. There was a moment where we decided, “You know what? Actually we could do a project out of it and really make a name and do it together.” That’s why we decided to start Wahoo. It was actually because we did a remix for Jazzanova and it was the first time that he was doing not just the keys. He was doing more. I felt like OK, he’s such a big part of it now, that we have to give this remix a different name than just the ‘Dixon remix’ and somewhere on the liner notes you’ll see, “Keys played by George Levin,” or something. I thought, OK, he’s done much more on this than ever before, so we call it Wahoo mix. From that point on, we were thinking about doing a house album that is not really a house album. We realized that even if I love this music, which has been around for 20 years or something, there’s maybe three or four house albums that I really like. I think we wanted to do a vocal house album. That was our big goal. We’re still sitting there and finishing it now. Tim Sweeney When do you think that’s going to get finished? Dixon It has to be finished in February. I was saying this one year ago. But now it’s really a deadline, so it needs to be finished in February. Tim Sweeney How does it work when you two go into the studio together? Dixon There’s two different things. First is like we’re jamming and we have no idea what we want and we’re just playing around. That means it could go in every direction. This is like 50% of what we’re doing, and the other 50% my partner George – he’s actually a songwriter, because he really has all these sketches where he’s writing lyrics, writing the melodies and having a really rough idea of how the track is going to be – then he’s bringing it to me. He’s playing it to me. I might like it or I just hate it. If I like it, we are thinking about how to produce it. I mean, in which direction to go if we want to have a live productions with live bass, or Rhodes, or whatever, or if we want to have it electronic track. It’s kind of like from the sketch on we think about which direction we want to go and then we go to it. Tim Sweeney When you say you guys you just start jamming, how does that work? Are you playing keyboards as well, or do you bring in another record? Dixon No, mostly it’s like I’m producing some beats. Even the beats we’re sitting together now. You never can say though because when you’re thinking about jamming and you have two persons, you know, there’s ... Timing is important. Maybe I’m coming in having a coffee and having my breakfast and he is already there. He’s playing some keys on the Rhodes and I’m sitting there and I’m saying, “Stop. I like that.” Then it goes on from there, or he is late or he is somewhere performing and I’m in the studio and producing some beats, or having a base line or whatever. Playing around and thinking that’s quite nice. I could work with Josh on it. It’s not like formula that you’re going by. Jamming is never a formula. Tim Sweeney Right. Well, when you guys go into the studio together, is it like a 9-5 thing for you, or is it you go later? Dixon It never was, but since there’s a serious deadline now, now it is. I’m not allowed to do any other thing than going to the studio from Monday to Thursday now. Yes, there’s a daytime studio time now that’s there for sure and if you feel like, you go on at night. Tim Sweeney Do you have a Wahoo thing that you wanted to play, or... Dixon Yeah. Since we’ve been working on the album for quite a while now, there’s one single released already that came out last year on Sonar Kollektiv. Now it just came out three months ago on Defected Record again. It’s this one. (music: Wahoo – “Make Em Shake It”) Tim Sweeney Did this come out on Defected? Dixon Yeah. It just came out three months ago. It was released on Sonar last year and then Defected picked it and said, “We like the track, but we don’t think many people have heard it yet.” It was successful on Sonar, but Defected, which is a really big label thought they could do much more with it. Tim Sweeney You’ve done other mixed CDs, right? Dixon Yeah. Tim Sweeney How would you put those together? The same way? Dixon It depends. I have done maybe it’s like five mix CDs or something and half of them it’s mixed in the club. I think never like a real live set at two o’clock at Saturday night and you start to press record and you stop it at some point. Mixed like in the club at Monday afternoon where I thought about what’s going to be on, and I just mixed it. The other one is the other half is done in Pro Tools. Tim Sweeney Which do you prefer? Dixon There’s this argument about as a DJ you have to do it live at the CD players, or at the vinyl players, whatever. I don’t think so. I think on a mixed CD it’s not about proving that you are the best technically, best DJ in the world. If you want to check this, come to the club and listen to me and make your opinion. I think the mixed CD is about the music, actually. It doesn’t matter for me how it’s done. If you do it in Pro Tools, for instance, you can do it also precisely and if you start to do it very precise, then you don’t find an end. You think this could be a little bit better and this and this. Even all the process there takes long. When you do it in a club, or at home, or whatever on your system, it’s 70 minutes and then it’s over. Maybe you don’t like it the first try and you do it a second time, but then again, it’s two hours. When you do it with Pro Tools, it just takes two hours to put in the files. You’re sitting there for like one day making volume changes and EQ changes and whatever you can do there. It’s a pain in the ass to do it. Of course it’s better in the terms if you can do it, you can do the best mix ever there. Technically, DJ beat mixing-wise or something. It’s no fun. The next one I’m going to do live again. It’s faster and it’s fun doing it. You’re standing there, you’re touching it and you just do your job. Working on Pro Tools or whatever you use on your computer, looking at the files gives you a completely different feel of the music. Then you’re thinking. You start to use your eyes and your brain starts. When you’re playing music, maybe you see the time that is left, or how much is left on the vinyl [makes gesture with his fingers]. That’s all you see. You just feel. That’s much more spontaneous and faster. Tim Sweeney Right. Do you have a mix CD coming out next year? Dixon Nothing is agreed yet, but there is two plans that we have. Tim Sweeney How do you feel the mix CDs – the ones that you’ve done – have helped you along with DJ bookings and things like that? Dixon They help of course. Tim Sweeney It’s not as much as production and ... Dixon The thing is that I don’t know how much people of you know me, but I’m not really a well known artist in this world. I think when it comes to the DJs in the world, I think everyone knows me, I have quite established name in this, but I never had a hit out, or I never had an album out, which really makes you recognized by the press then, and you get reviews. [Whether they’re] bad or good, you have something out there. Everything I was doing was doing remix. I was a DJ, and I was playing in Berlin for twelve years. Since lot of DJs from all over the world came to Berlin, to play Berlin, because Berlin’s such a beautiful city. Everyone wants to come there once. I had a lot of people from all over the world in my club that I invited. There was big, almost like it opened goals for me to go somewhere else. Once I had a mixed CD out, it was the first time for the media to really write about project of me. That really helped a lot, I have to say. Luckily enough, there was nothing really bad about it, so that’s why it helped, maybe. Tim Sweeney Right, OK. Switch around, are there any artists now that you’re really into at the moment? Dixon Heinrich Schwartz, that’s someone that I’m really into. Lindstrom is someone that I really dig right now. Quentin Harris is someone from New York that I’m really respecting for doing really good vocal productions, and Carl Craig. Tim Sweeney With label wise, any labels that have been ... Dixon I think there’s no label around that I just trust. Tim Sweeney Really? Dixon There’s good music everywhere. Maybe Planet E, for instance, the Carl Craig label, but then again, I think there’s no label around that is releasing ten records and I like ten of them. Tim Sweeney Your own label or anything? Dixon Of course I love my own label. Tim Sweeney I heard you own a sandwich shop in Berlin, is that right? Dixon Yeah. Tim Sweeney Is this like another way of being able to just DJ full time, is you have to have the sandwich shop? Dixon I’m 29, I’m not that old. When I that never in my life, that actually means nearly nothing. I have to say that never in my life I was really doing, having a decision made by thinking about something really long. When I was five or something, I was into soccer. I played for a football team and it was not like my dad was telling me I have to play soccer or I thought, I have to play soccer. I was just doing it. I had problems with my knees when I was 12. I was playing on a semi-professional level and I had to stop playing soccer. Then I was doing long running after, but it was naturally going on. When I was 16 I had also to stop these, because again, I had problem with my knees. All of a sudden, when I was 15 or something, I went to a nightclub for the first time in my life. I was never going to discotheques before, whatever. The first time I was going out, I was going out to Tresor club. It was hitting me straight away. Within two weeks, I was on the turntables. It was not like I was thinking about, I have to be a DJ or somehow, it just happened. With the shop now, it’s completely the same. I was not thinking, ‘The music business is really bad, I have to do something else, I have to invest money somehow.’ No, the story is we have a football club that we founded, people from the scene, because we wanted to play football once a week. One year after we started a bar, where we were screening football because we thought that places where you could watch football were always crap. We just wanted to have a really small little thing where we all could just hang out on Wednesday nights and Saturdays to watch the football games. After two years or something, it was running so well that we had, “OK, now we have a place for midweek hangout spots, so let’s have a daytime hangout spot and start a sandwich shop.” We had no clue how to do it. It’s also, again, a typical Berlin thing. I don’t really know about Seattle, but I have the feeling I couldn't do it here becuase the prices on a proper street, when you want to open a shop here, you can’t afford as a DJ. In Berlin, you have all these empty shops around and you have these really cool streets where places rent for 600 euros a month. If you were like two persons that have an idea of doing a shop, that’s not such a high risk. You can just try it. You have galleries popping up everywhere, just trying to be a good gallery. A lot of them close after half a year, but people were trying it and they were not losing tons of money. They were just trying it, it was not working well, OK, they tried. It was the same for us, we thought, ‘Yeah, we have really good taste. We know how a cafe has to be, what’s good sandwich. Let’s do it.’ Now it’s running for three years and it’s good, it’s running good. Audience Member In the music business, how are you finding the MP3 market for dance music in particular? Do you think that you’re getting a fair shot from the people that run legal downloading sites? Or do you think that, because it’s dance music and maybe therefore in the eyes of the people that run things like iTunes, is it any less important and are you getting any less coverage? Dixon Over the last years, everyone heard already that the music industry is doing really bad, and the numbers of sales are going really down. At the same time, the artists are not earning less money than before. Da Gama, which is the company in Germany that has the rights on the music, the collecting agency, they’re writing really good numbers because, the problem is that the company is earning less money because the sales of CDs or vinyl is going down. There’s the ringtones, there’s the digital downloads, there’s more and more TV companies in the world, they’re doing their own productions and needing music for it. Me as a person who is bringing out a track, I might sell half of what I was selling five years age or something, but because there’s more markets like the MP3 market or the ringtone markets that I maybe don’t really like or something but it’s there, I still earn the same money with the same music. Me as a DJ, I don’t like the MP3 format. I think it sounds crap and I think you can hear it, especially in a club. You might not hear it in a car, you might not hear it at your shitty sound system at home or in the office or whatever, so it works there. Especially in a club where it’s all about the bass for instance, I don’t like MP3. I think it’s a really easy access for people to get music. You can just listen something in the radio and you can have instant access to it. That’s like a big step, I think, for the music. First of all, I really like that it’s there, this digital market, it’s just an extra market for me as an artist or as a label owner. When it comes to the share that we get out of it, I don’t really have a final opinion about it already now. I think it’s extra money to be cashed in. You don’t really need to do something for it. You don’t need to take the risks to produce a record and press 10,000 records because you expected it’s going to be a really big track and then it’s selling 2,000 records and you really lost a lot of money. You give it to internet company, to download portal, and if they sell it they sell it. If not, not. Of course you have to do, like you find your way through which company is good and what’s the best strategy to do it, but I think it’s an extra market. The money that comes in there now, I think it’s quite okay. I’m thinking I’m going to play one of the tracks from our album that is coming out, which is a non-house track, and then after this I’m going to play, in my opinion, the best house track of 2005. The first one is Wahoo. (music: Wahoo – “Sun in My Candelight”)

---

Title: DJ Magic Mike
Date: 2015-04-21
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/dj-magic-mike-boot-the-bass/

DJ Magic Mike
Magic Mike has been the driving force behind Florida’s huge bass music phenomenon since the late ‘80s, but his earnings go beyond exploring the ultimate ‘boom’. The man has also played a crucial role in paving the way for turntablists such as DJ Q-Bert or DJ Craze. Perhaps even more importantly, Magic Mike is credited with casually making the female rump the only subject of a whole genre and in doing so topping the charts since 1988. The Orlando native has one platinum and five gold albums under his belt and has been described by Vibe magazine as “the best platinum-selling artist you’ve never heard of.” Take a trip to the world of car shows, bass bins, booties and sustained 808 with the real Flo-rida in this lecture from the 2004 Red Bull Music Academy.
Hosted by TORSTEN SCHMIDT Let’s welcome our man Magic Mike, Michael Hampton. [applause] EMMA WARREN This is the man that Vibe Magazine described as the best platinum artist you never heard of. And he’s also been described as booty bass’s Master P. I don’t know how you feel about these descriptions, but you’re the don. DJ MAGIC MIKE [laughs] TORSTEN SCHMIDT I mean, what do you do when even Egon can’t shy away from saying, “Oh, he’s the baddest DJ.” But I guess, we’ve got enough of that honey around your belly right now. So please tell us: Florida, the South East and all that, what is bass music to start with, and what role does Orlando play in it? DJ MAGIC MIKE Well, let’s answer the first one. Bass was really not a genre until 1985 when MC A.D.E. came out. He did a song that primarily focused on ‘boom’ and bottom end. He was the first one that did it – he was from Fort Lauderdale. So he came out and did his thing, and shortly after that, there was Luke and 2 Live in Miami, and they had their own sound, pretty much down in South. Orlando wasn’t known for anything because nobody’s ever done anything and nobody ever came out. And so I started working in Orlando at first, and did my demos, all that. Nothing was really panning out, in Orlando, so I decided to take a trip down South, and I teamed up with Clay D. First track I did when I got to Miami was “Creep Dog” and then “Boot The Booty”. I did the scratches on “Give It All You Got” and co-produced the beat, even though we got bamboozled out of the credit on that, but that’s a different story. But when I went to Miami, I took Orlando with me. I didn’t want to specifically sound like someone from Miami. Because all the DJs in Miami were moulding themselves after Mr. Mixx from 2 Live. I knew I was better than him, I didn’t want to sound like him and I didn’t want to go in that direction. So when I went to Miami I started doing my own thing. And once I started doing my thing, then everybody started moulding themselves after me. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Who is this Mr. Mixx guy? DJ MAGIC MIKE Mr. Mixx was 2 Live Crew’s DJ. Not to take anything away from him, because he’s a very cool guy. As far as his skills, he had his thing with what he was doing. And I just did not want to sound like him, but that’s just old school mentality, you know you don’t bite, you don’t sound like anybody else, you come up with your own thing – and that was what I was doing. So nobody was chirping the fast beats, nobody was transforming the fast beats, and Mixx wasn’t doing it, because he was just using a bunch of Skillet & Leroy samples... just comedy or whatever, unless it was his megamixes. I was pretty much the only DJ in Miami that was being showcased as a good DJ on record. And then after that, everybody else started coming out. I was the first one to kind of go down there and do it. EMMA WARREN You kind of said that you brought your thing, because you didn’t want to sound like everyone else in Miami. What exactly was your thing and how did that develop? DJ MAGIC MIKE Orlando was a melting pot and actually still is. You had people from every place in Orlando. So you didn’t just have Miami bass, you didn’t have just hip hop, you didn’t have just West Coast, you had everything all moulded to the same thing. I could listen to Joe Cooley, I could listen to Cash Money or I could listen to Jazzy Jeff. You know, Scratch, my cousin from EPMD, me and him, we practiced together. We had our own little thing. I could do whatever I wanted to do. If you were in New York, you couldn’t play Miami. If you were in Miami, you didn’t want to play New York. West Coast was kind of neutral but not really, because they had their own thing. It was alright being in Orlando, because I could do what I wanted to do. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What was this cousin bit all about – you said your cousin, Scratch? It is not really common that you have two DJs in a family right? DJ MAGIC MIKE [laughs] Everyone says that too. I started DJing when I was 12. Scratch started when he was 10. I was into sports, I liked all that. But then I was drawn to music, and that was what I started doing, and we started practising together. When I started coming up with stuff, he wasn’t into it, but then he got into it as well, and we just kind of grew into it together. EMMA WARREN You started DJing at a very young age. At 14, you were DJing at a local roller disco, is that right? Did you do that together with your cousin? DJ MAGIC MIKE No, because he was in Florida, and then he went back to New York. I stayed in Florida. I didn’t go back to New York until ’84/’85. But we constantly stayed in contact and visited each other. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Did you trade music, as in sending tapes? DJ MAGIC MIKE Yeah. We’d always sent tapes or played our mixes over the phone. EMMA WARREN I’m kind of intrigued to know what your roller disco soundtrack was like? What were you playing? DJ MAGIC MIKE Oh god, let’s go back. Prince – “Let’s Work”, Secret Weapon - “Must Be The Music”, Bill Summers & Summers Heat, the group Kleeer... it was a bunch of different stuff until “Planet Rock” came. Then everything changed, as far as Florida was concerned. TORSTEN SCHMIDT How different is playing to a roller rink, to any other places you played later on? Did you do the mic stuff as well? DJ MAGIC MIKE No, I’m not a mic guy at all. Didn’t do a lot of talking. Back then I had to say, “What’s up?”, “How ya doin’?”, “Good night, see you next week,” and all that kind of stuff. But I wasn’t a mic guy, I let my hands do the talking for me. As long as you keep people occupied and paying attention to the music, they don’t care if you’re saying anything on the mic. EMMA WARREN You have just mentioned “Planet Rock”, and said everything changed at that point. Obviously that part of America interpreted that kind of blueprint in a different way to the rest of America. It seems like everywhere took that starting point and 10, 15, 20 years on, they’ve ended up with something different. Why do you think your area developed the sound that it did? DJ MAGIC MIKE I think “Planet Rock” was universal back then. It was a worldwide sound. But we were already doing fast beats at that time anyway. And so people took it and moulded it in their way. And when everyone else started changing and developing their own styles, Florida just stuck with the “Planet Rock” sound. And it’s still there to this day in one form or another. TORSTEN SCHMIDT A couple of years later, you did a “Planet Rock” remix yourself. It’s always a kind of risk taking on a classic which you love, and which a lot of people know. DJ MAGIC MIKE You know I got paid a huge compliment from Bambaataa about the remix. He told me that my version was the only one that stayed true to it and that it was the only one that he liked, out of all of them. So I was like “okay, that’s cool”. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What did you change in your version? DJ MAGIC MIKE You know what, I really didn’t. When we did the remixes, they sent out the 24-track master. So then I took the master to the studio, and started listening to all the things in the tracks that he didn’t use. I knew I was going to use the vocals. But I wanted to hear the weird sounds, the ones they’d said “Ah, we’re not going to use that” – those sounds. Once I started hearing those, I was sampling them, playing them and just having a good time with it. So I used those sounds and changed the beat. It was electroish. I kept it that way, but added an old school feel to it. So I started finding loops and concocting loops for it, and I put my ‘boom’ in it. Just to bring it back down South. TORSTEN SCHMIDT We’ve got to talk about the ‘boom’. How do you get it properly? DJ MAGIC MIKE [laughs] When I first started doing it, it was just an 808. That was the first drum machine I ever had. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Was it customized? DJ MAGIC MIKE No. Before I knew how to go inside and tweak everything, I just turned the sustain all the way up on it. That was it. So you hit it and... ‘boom’ – cool. Everything was derived from there. Even before I learned how to go inside the machine and tweak it, I learned to sample it and then slow it down. Once I sampled it and slowed it down, it was a different one. Finally, I figured to go into the machine, just being young and inquisitive, just messing with the machine, I started turning a little screw, that’s right under the sustain, which kind of held the sustain from going so far, because if you go far past that point you won’t hear it anymore. I started making patterns with it. Instead of just‚ ‘boom’ ... ‘boooooom’ – I started having fun with it. But then it got to a point where that note was too short. Then you had to come up with something else. Instead of using the 808, I took the sustain and turned it all the way down to 30 Hz; until I had just the moan. I sampled it into my keyboard. Then put the kick on top of it. ‘Boooooooooom’! Now I could have it last as long as I wanted it to last – once I had it in loop mode. TORSTEN SCHMIDT When it comes to sonics on that end. How did you manage to not let a bass like that clash with the actual kick? DJ MAGIC MIKE Well, just by looking at frequencies. With the ‘boom’, you want to feel it more so than hear it. And with the kick, you want to hear it more so than feel it. If you feel it, that’s fine. As long as you have the sustain going on, I used to keep that anywhere from 70 Hz and lower, and then I just cut it off. And so my kicks would always start 75-ish and then go up to wherever they want to go. This way they would never cross. But if they ever did cross, you would have ‘mmmmm-mmm-mmmmm-mmm-mmmmm-mmm’. Then you would get all kinds of fluctuations coming back. EMMA WARREN I’d quite like to know where the whole obsession with bass comes from. What is the power of the bassline? DJ MAGIC MIKE OK, I want to go back to the beginnings of what happened. When I did “Drop The Bass” back in 1988, someone took it – they took the song and slowed it all the way down to make the bass last longer. The average person would be pissed when something like that had been done to your song. “Why did they do this? Why did they take my song and slowed it all the way down?” I was in the process of working on my first album – the Royal Posse album. I had one song left to go. And so I said: “OK, now I have a treat for this.” I grabbed my engineer and told him: “I want to do just a slowed down song with a lot of bass in it. If they try to slow it down any more, they either will tear their speakers up or they won’t hear it.” And that was what we did. We sat in the studio for probably three days, just trying to concoct the ‘boom’. We recorded it, took it to the car, went back to the studio, until we got one that was exactly right. I sampled this bass and used it for “Feel The Bass”. That was the first track. TORSTEN SCHMIDT You just mentioned cars. What’s the relation between cars and bass? DJ MAGIC MIKE Everyone knows that when you listen to something in your car, you really hear it because you are in a confined space. If the highs are too loud, you know it immediately. If there’s too much mid-range, you know it immediately. And if it’s too much ‘boom’, you know it immediately also. We like the ‘boom’, so we test everything in the car – especially now because I put everything on CD. The first thing I do is take the CD and listen to it in my truck. If it sounds good in my car, it’s perfect. TORSTEN SCHMIDT When you’re saying truck, we’re not talking the same cars we’ve seen on Roman streets? DJ MAGIC MIKE No, not really. I use my car mainly for testing low-end anyway, not necessarily for high-end. I like to test my low-end in something that’s closed and confined. Once I know that it’s perfect there, then I’m OK with it. TORSTEN SCHMIDT It’s one thing to have a rattling bass, and another to have a good sounding bass. At British raves, they used to say that the bass is only right, if you put a can on top of the speaker and it would jump. But it sounded shit. DJ MAGIC MIKE You can’t do it in a car that has no quality to it. In the truck that I was using there was no rattle, no shake, there was nothing. So when you put it in and heard ‘boom’, you heard ‘boom’. But you often hear cars right down the street playing and it goes ‘brrrrrrrr’, the whole car was about to shake apart. That’s not a car that you want to test it in. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Would MTV be able to afford doing a Pimp My Ride episode in Orlando style? Or would that just totally blow their budget? DJ MAGIC MIKE [laughs] No. I think they could handle it. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What would my ride need? DJ MAGIC MIKE It depends on your trunk space. It depends on what kind of car you have. Some people, when they don’t have a big enough car, they use their whole back seat and the trunk for a box. What happens is: People put it in and then it sounds good for a minute. But all of a sudden they want more. Then they’ll continue until you can’t go on any further; and then you’ll blow your front windshield out, [laughs] AUDIENCE MEMBER Have you seen that? DJ MAGIC MIKE Yeah, actually I’ve seen that. I have that on video. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What is a car audio battle? DJ MAGIC MIKE Well, in the States they do it now pretty much once a year in different parts. It’s called IASCA. They have big sound-offs. The last two years, it’s been in Daytona. It’s a big sound-off during spring break. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Excuse our ignorance, but what is a sound off? DJ MAGIC MIKE The loudest car wins, pretty much. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Can you picture the scenario? DJ MAGIC MIKE They don’t do it outside, they do it inside the convention center. It’s the whole weekend. You can’t sit in the car, it’s too loud. You need to protect your ears. If it’s too loud to get in, they just put in a mic to test how loud the car is. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Isn’t this a bit like blowing up the world and seeing what’s left over? DJ MAGIC MIKE Yeah. But that’s just the way it is. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Going back from the car technicalities to the studio technicalities. You’ve already been talking about the 808. But what’s the importance of things like the SP or MPC? What did you use when you set your sampled 808? DJ MAGIC MIKE I came from the 808. Then I went to an SP1200. Everyone knows that the SP1200 is great for drums, but you have no time, only ten seconds. I said: “OK, I’ll start learning MIDI.” Then I bought a sampler, a Yamaha TX16W. It had just an unbearable amount of sampling time, something like six minutes mono, stereo only three minutes. But for the late ’80s and early ’90s, this was a lot of time. Everything that I needed as far as vocals, I would do a scratch and sample it. It had that much sampling time. But then you get to a point where that’s not enough. The next thing was the MPC. So I got the MPC-60. Now I had 26 seconds, when I expanded the MPC. But when the 60 MkII came out, I had to have that. And then the MPC 3000 came out. I still use this one. I bought the 2000 when it came out, but I hated it. It just sounded horrible. But my 3000 is perfect. I bought gear and everything, connected it with the computer. Now I have way more time than I could possibly ever need. TORSTEN SCHMIDT So you must have been already pretty settled back then, being able to afford all the newest gear. DJ MAGIC MIKE Mhhh. TORSTEN SCHMIDT At the beginning, all the artists usually have these stories about being fucked over. If I’m not totally misinformed, you have been successful from pretty early on. DJ MAGIC MIKE My first dealings in the music industry were like those of the majority of people. You pay your dues, you get screwed. I was naive, didn’t realize, didn’t know – with all my releases on Vision. When I was working with Clay D, I was young and I just wanted to make the quick dollar. I got in and I was working. But you don’t get the credit you deserve. And when you don’t get the credit, then you have nothing to fall back on because someone else gets your credit. Down the road, when you want to get your money for royalties, publishing or whatever, you can’t get it because it’s not there. And they’re not gonna give it back to you unless you have the money to file a lawsuit and all that other stuff. You’ll hate coming to all that. I use it as a lesson learned. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Do you own your own publishing? DJ MAGIC MIKE Now I own my own publishing. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Can you explain how the whole publishing works? So far, we haven’t talked about that. DJ MAGIC MIKE That is tricky. When you are a writer, your works of music usually are owned by yourself – unless you sign your publishing away. But labels get a little tricky and try to sneak that away from you. You have to pay attention to your contracts. If they sneak in “work for hire”, then you’re screwed. They might not say “we’re taking your publishing”, but usually “work for hire” means that they own whatever you do. You might not realize what this means until you have to file a lawsuit. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Are there any other common traps in the small print? So “work for hire” is one thing... DJ MAGIC MIKE That was the one that trapped me back then. After that I started my own label. Then I didn’t really have to worry about it any more. At that point I wouldn’t look at all the other labels’ contracts. TORSTEN SCHMIDT If I had a demo here and I wanted it to get signed somewhere – do you have any recommendations of what to avoid? DJ MAGIC MIKE My recommendation is: put it out yourself! Even if you put it out yourself and you don’t sell as much as if it was on a major label, you still make all the money. So you can take that money and put it into your next project and keep building and keep going. We we did the Royal Posse album, what we wanted to do was 20,000 units. We wanted to sell 20,000 units and see it on Billboard. That was all we wanted to do. At the end we sold way over 20,000. We weren’t really aware of that. We just kept selling and kept selling and kept selling. And one day someone said: “We need to count how many units we sold.” We started it in Orlando, just driving from record store to record store and doing consignments. Then we took care of all of Florida. We sold it to a little one-stop in Miami and they took care of getting it all over Florida. Once that happened, we dealt the whole South East, and then it was the whole US. TORSTEN SCHMIDT You said that you were driving from shop to shop with your car. Obviously, once it moved beyond the South West, you couldn’t do that on your own anymore. What are the things you are looking at when you start working with a distributor? DJ MAGIC MIKE We didn’t deal with a distributor. It was a one-stop. It was pretty easy at that point. Once the one-stop said that they wanted to work the project, it was easy. We did the manufacturing and shipped to them, they took care of all the stores. We didn’t really hit a distributor until 1991 or 1992. Then we finally decided to go through a national distributor. The distributor is dealing with so many different labels, so we needed someone in staff to make all the calls to the different stores. We still took care of our area, but now we had to check a national list of stores. We took care of states by the week. Like this week we’re going to do Texas, next week we’re going to do New York or whatever. We dealt with it, we had enough people to do it. Making sure that the stores had stock, that was pretty much the only basis of these calls: “You have stock? What’s going on with the record in your area? You don’t have stock?” OK, you write it down, get in touch with the distributor and tell them that this store still hasn’t got stock. The distributor’s not going to have time to call. They’re not going to. That was the thing when we started working with a distributor. I liked it better when it was just the label and the one-stop. It was a lot easier to deal with. TORSTEN SCHMIDT When you’re saying that you had enough people – that’s usually one of the biggest traps you can step into as a small business just starting out. You get to the point when there’s too much label and you need to employ people. But suddenly your overhead is skyrocketing. DJ MAGIC MIKE As long as you don’t have the money coming in, your overhead will skyrocket. But with our first album, we were selling and selling. We didn’t realize what we were or where we were at. Once we counted how many albums we had sold, we were at 1.3 million copies. When you sell half a million copies, that generates anywhere from 2.3 to 2.5 million dollars! We knew money came in, and it was a lot of it. But we couldn’t keep up with everything. So we brought people in to be able to do all of that. EMMA WARREN You sold your records from the back of your van. What do you get from that DIY approach to distribution, especially at the beginning of a label? DJ MAGIC MIKE Just the humbleness to always know where you came from and how it got started. No one’s going to sell your project better than you. If you were working for me and tried to sell my record to him, you would be trying to sell it to the best of your ability. But he would respect me more if I was walking in and saying: “This is my new CD. Check it out and let me know what you think. If you can do something with it – cool.” People tend to appreciate that a lot more. TORSTEN SCHMIDT How are you dealing with, let’s say iTunes. Would you walk up to Steve Jobs and say: “Look Steve, I got the stuff. Would you put it on iTunes?” DJ MAGIC MIKE Probably not. I would promote it and try to build a buzz from the ground up. Once the buzz gets big, I would let him call me. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Well, fair enough. But not everyone is in that lucky situation. DJ MAGIC MIKE But you have to be able to maintain it – just in case. If they don’t call, well, as long as you’re doing okay on your own, then you sell your records. TORSTEN SCHMIDT How would you be dealing with chain stores? DJ MAGIC MIKE We dealt with a lot of chains. Once we started getting into the chains, that was more a distributor thing. The one-stops did it as much as they could until you’re dealing with hundreds of thousands of units. Then you’re out of the one-stops’ control. They can only sell so much. After that you got to have a distributor just to keep that kind of numbers going. The manufacturer that we were using, they could work on nobody’s product except ours. We had the manufacturer just constantly make our product, 24 hours a day. And they couldn’t keep up. Once you get to that kind of level, then you have to go to a distributor. You really have no choice with that. TORSTEN SCHMIDT OK, right now, when you are at that spot, what are the common traps to avoid? I mean, the artist is always pissed off at the label, the label is always pissed with the distributor. DJ MAGIC MIKE I know both sides of it. Artists usually get pissed off at the labels because of not getting enough money in their pocket and not doing enough promotion. Labels get pissed off at distributors because money’s not being paid in time. If you have 30 or 60 days terms in your contract, then you expect the money after 30 or 60 days. But then all of a sudden something is wrong and they don’t send the money, but they still want the product. EMMA WARREN What is special with your style of DJing? Can you explain that? DJ MAGIC MIKE That’s a hard question. EMMA WARREN What kind of skills do you need to be a bass DJ? DJ MAGIC MIKE See, I really don’t classify myself as a bass DJ. I’m not a genre orientated DJ, I’m just a DJ. I just like music. So it doesn’t really matter what kind of music it is as long as it fits what I like then I can get something out of it. I’ve got the biggest hip-hop night in Orlando right now, it has been going on for three years. When we go on the road, I play hip-hop, reggae, soul, but more so stuff that I’m into now. I like the new school, just tweak that sound and all kind of weird things. Sometimes you can’t really play it, but we found a way to get it in. I try not to make myself known as “he’s this kind of a DJ”. It’s just: I like DJing and I like all aspects of it. EMMA WARREN You said you found ways to work it in. What are those ways? DJ MAGIC MIKE Once you get the crowd in your control, then push the envelope. Don’t be afraid. And we push it. We will push the envelope to no end. When I show up with a record bag, you never know what’s going to play. TORSTEN SCHMIDT How many records are there? DJ MAGIC MIKE Oh... [laughs], it depends. I’m still using my Shure record bags. They hold probably 60 records. And I usually keep doubles of every record because I never know what I want to do. Also in the bags I probably have three to four different genres of music. We play everything from new school to drum ’n’ bass, to reggae, to hip-hop. The thing is also that most DJs can’t do that now. They just can’t. If someone is doing a party, you will get one DJ for hip-hop, one DJ for reggae, another DJ for doing a live PA or something like that and then the drum ’n’ bass DJ will play new school, he won’t play breaks. It’s kind of weird. When we show up, we play everything. And we’re doing it in a way you’ll like it. You won’t even realize that the music’s been changed when it’s changing. TORSTEN SCHMIDT I guess you must quite like it to see that in mainstream American hip-hop you got a lot of these electronic sounds being very dominant again, also a lot of ’80s references that are very bass-ish. DJ MAGIC MIKE Our hip-hop night is intelligent, to say the least. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Now that’s going to be an interesting one. What do you mean with that? Backpackers? DJ MAGIC MIKE No, not backpacker. The scene in Orlando has changed a lot. You get a lot of ‘push button’ DJs, a lot of DJs that download a song. They play hip-hop, they have no choice. Not because they love the music, they have to play it because if they don’t, they will not be paid. That kind of a DJ brings a certain type of crowd. And it’s not going to be a crowd that’s in tune to what they’re doing because they’re not doing anything. Our hip hop crowd is intelligent because they know what we do and how we do it. They get into the style more so than the song. I won’t leave a record alone; you might hear 30 seconds of it. Nothing plays all night. You hear 30 seconds, you might hear a minute, you might here a hook, you might hear a record that starts at the third verse – we take the night and make it a melting pot. Like a big mastermix, and then it is what it is. EMMA WARREN When you slip your bass tunes into the mix, what do you do if there’s going to be a shift on the dancefloor? DJ MAGIC MIKE You have to find the time for it. I don’t play bass all the time. And even so, I very seldom play my songs. Every so often I slip one in. But even then, people might hear 30 seconds of it. If they hear a minute of a song from me, they’re doing good. It could be the biggest song out. I don’t care. As soon as I get bored with, my crowd will get bored with it. Then I’m moving on. TORSTEN SCHMIDT How far can you stretch that total alertness in the crowd? DJ MAGIC MIKE As long as it falls within the reggae/hip-hop genre then we’re OK. But I couldn’t get away with an electronic song. People are not going for it. We can’t stretch it to those kind of boundaries. But as far as what we play, we stretch it pretty far. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What about other types of bass sounds? There’s a lot of other cities where they try to combine various styles as well. But the whole Lil’ Jon thing is totally different to Detroit ghetto tech and stuff like that. Could you enlighten us how those styles came about and how you learned about them? DJ MAGIC MIKE I’ll start with Detroit. There was a time in my career where I was playing in Detroit probably once every three or four months. Just because of what I was doing, the South had started getting national appeal, we were always in Detroit. And when we did “Drop The Bass” it was just so huge. Actually, it broke in Florida first and in Detroit second. That was when I realized that everything that was going on in Detroit was totally different to what was happening in Florida. As far as bass was concerned, they had the ghetto tech and that was just their style of bass music. It was like a hybrid of bass, techno and house. But it was just so fast. Down South, they weren’t buying it, they didn’t want to hear it at all. So Detroit wasn’t working as far as the South East was concerned, but the South was working as far as Detroit was concerned. What they would do with Florida music was to take it and just speed it up. Where we were just 130-ish, as far as bpms, Detroit was 160 plus. If a record wasn’t fast enough, they would pitch it up positive 8 on the turntables. Everything was just constantly moving that fast. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Were there common signature tunes at the beginning of it? DJ MAGIC MIKE I don’t know a lot of Detroit music. I know DJ Godfather and I’d know the songs if I heard them, but I’d never play them at home. The only time I would hear these songs is when I went to Detroit. But I wouldn’t play them there because that’s what they’re hearing anyway. I would never play anything from Detroit unless I knew the person. At home, I couldn’t play it anyway. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What about stuff like Dynamix II? Earlier you mentioned Cybotron and their song "Clear". Was that big down there as well? DJ MAGIC MIKE Dynamix II, that was from Florida. Clear was from 1982/’83. This record was big at home, but it didn’t fall into the Detroit sound for us. It was pretty much like the “Body Mechanic” stuff. Quadrant Six was coming out at that time. It was so early in the game that nobody really paid attention to where it was from. "Clear" was huge in Florida. Almost every bass song that I can think of sampled "Clear" in some form or another. Once you start getting into the ghettotech and stuff like that, none of that made it in Florida. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What about the other cities then? DJ MAGIC MIKE Atlanta and the whole Lil’ John thing, that is a totally different game. Lil’ John derived from Jermaine Dupri and the So So Def Bass All-Stars. TORSTEN SCHMIDT When are we talking then? DJ MAGIC MIKE Ooh, when did “My Boo” come out? Must have been 1994-95. That was when Lil’ John started doing his thing with bass because he saw what’s happening with it down South in Florida. Everything from Florida was huge in Atlanta, but Atlanta didn’t have a sound at that time, other than Outkast, which was their thing, but that wasn’t classified as bass at all. When Lil’ John started that he kind of took the bass thing and changed it. His sound had mass appeal, but it lost the street credibility. Nobody really paid a lot of attention to the So So Def Bass All-Stars. The first one did great because of “My Boo”. When they did volume two, the sales went down, and of volume three, nobody really knew that it existed. And that was it pretty much for their relationship; Lil’ John started doing his own thing and the rest is history with him. A couple of months ago, he was credited in Scratch Magazine saying that I was the reason that he was doing what he is doing to this day. TORSTEN SCHMIDT You were saying that everything that was big in Florida came out of Atlanta. What’s the connection there? DJ MAGIC MIKE None, really – other than the strip clubs, that’s pretty much it [laughs]. TORSTEN SCHMIDT But what is the connection between strip clubs and bass then? DJ MAGIC MIKE Booty shakin’, [laughs]. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Uh-huh, OK. Someone said the other day that you were the first one to actually have ‘booty’ in a record title. DJ MAGIC MIKE “Boot The Booty”. Yeah, you might be right. I can’t think of one before that. [one of the participants queries this statement] TORSTEN SCHMIDT Well, we’ll put that on the forum. We can discuss it there at length. The same person explained to me that in the 1920s, women in bathing suits or with their backs exposed were already a huge fascination luring people to come to Florida for their holidays. What is that all about? DJ MAGIC MIKE I don’t know. I have always been more on the bass side than on the booty side. That was because I didn’t wanna be like Luke and 2 Live Crew. I didn’t become a part of the whole booty side of bass music. TORSTEN SCHMIDT So you don’t appreciate the booty? DJ MAGIC MIKE No, I appreciate the booty [laughs]. But not as far as my music is concerned. I like to listen to it, I like to play it, but with my music I didn’t wanted to go in that direction. EMMA WARREN But your song title was “Boot The Booty” and not “Boot The Bass”. DJ MAGIC MIKE But I didn’t title that one. That was Cool Rock and Chaszy Chess. They were part of the Clay D staff. I worked with them in my early days when I went to Miami. The whole song was about nothing. It was just about booty. There was no lyrics, there was nothing going on in that song. We were just inside the vocal booth and talking, having a conversation. It was just ‘boot the booty’. And then we went back to talking. So there was no structure to the song at all. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What would you be talking about then? DJ MAGIC MIKE We talked about booty, but not in the form or fashion of a booty song. There was no verse that you could sing, there was nothing that you could rap to, there was nothing going on in that song. It was just the hook ‘boot the booty’. TORSTEN SCHMIDT I may be a little bit narrow-minded, but what’s the difference between a song talking about the booty and a booty song? DJ MAGIC MIKE Actually, that’s the same. There really isn’t any difference. But I was doing bass music, more so than booty music. There’s a big difference between those two... TORSTEN SCHMIDT ...which is? DJ MAGIC MIKE Booty music has bass, but bass music doesn’t talk about booty. (laughs) It’s easy. Mostly our booty songs have bass in them. But just because it’s a bass song, it doesn’t necessarily mean that it’s talking about booty. TORSTEN SCHMIDT So you’re free to talk about everything. DJ MAGIC MIKE It could be an instrumental as well. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What’s the percentage of instrumentals and vocal songs? DJ MAGIC MIKE I was the first person doing instrumental bass music. It was pretty much just instrumental songs with a lot of ‘boom’. They were more so designed for the cars, more so than anything else. Some DJs started playing these records in clubs as well because people liked the sound of the songs in a club. But these were instrumentals, so there was nothing really to go on at that point. The first single from my fourth album Ain’t No Doubt About It was “Feel The Bass III”. Radio picked up on it and that album went gold. It’s kind of weird. It just has to be at the right time or the right place. EMMA WARREN Bass songs are either instrumentals or about booty. What other things do bass songs talk about if they’re not instrumental? DJ MAGIC MIKE Bass. That’s pretty much it. EMMA WARREN Bass? DJ MAGIC MIKE It’s pretty much just about bass. There’s really no other subject for the conversation. EMMA WARREN Have you ever had a non-instrumental bass track that wasn’t about either bass or booty? DJ MAGIC MIKE An instrumental? EMMA WARREN A track that isn’t instrumental... DJ MAGIC MIKE Umm... no. Because, if there’s a lot of low-end in the song and it’s instrumental, it’s still a bass song. It’s more about the music than about anything else. Because if you take all the bass out of the song, it’s still an instrumental song at that point. TORSTEN SCHMIDT How is something like L’Trimm considered in that part of the scene? DJ MAGIC MIKE They really weren’t part of it. It was pop at that time. TORSTEN SCHMIDT But did you feel like that was taking away anything from you guys? DJ MAGIC MIKE No. At home, they really didn’t play it too much. They didn’t acknowledge it. Atlantic picked it up and it became a crossover thing, almost like a fad; that’s pretty much what it was. They had this one song and tried to come back with something else, and that was it for them. It was just a pop-oriented hit that took off into the pop world, but not with the street. TORSTEN SCHMIDT How many of those cycles have you seen throughout your career? Cycles like being in the public attention, having all the journalists ringing your house, not ringing your house 12 months later anymore and coming back after three years or so. DJ MAGIC MIKE Quite a few actually, but not as far as bass music was concerned. As long as I’ve been doing this, I’ve seen a lot of things come up and a lot of things go down. But my motto is: always sit right here in the middle. I don’t want to be on the top, I don’t want to be on the bottom. I just want to sit right here in the middle. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What were the grossest things you heard about stuff that you’ve been doing? DJ MAGIC MIKE One thing that I heard that was real gross: if you’re in a car and it’s too much low-end in the song, it will make you poop on yourself. [laughs] TORSTEN SCHMIDT Well, we’ve heard that physically there might be a connection between the sphincter muscle and bass. Mr. Rosner talked about that subject. That might be probably the dark room end of the car audio battle, stuff going on in the backroom, hmmm? DJ MAGIC MIKE Yeah... [laughs] EMMA WARREN So we’re going to hear one of your tunes now. DJ MAGIC MIKE Yeah, I’m going to play the last one I did. I recorded that about a month ago. It just kind of shows where I’m at and what I’m into now. (music: Magic Mike - “unknown” / applause) TORSTEN SCHMIDT So people have glow sticks in their cars, no? DJ MAGIC MIKE [laughs] EMMA WARREN There was definitely some rave bassline, hoover business going on. DJ MAGIC MIKE Just a little bit. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Seriously, in a club, you would have played how many records by now? DJ MAGIC MIKE It depends. If I’m playing some place where I can play breaks tracks, then nine out of ten tracks will be my own stuff. Sometimes it leaves me in that direction, sometimes it doesn’t. Sometimes I like it harder and angrier, it just depends on my mood. But I always try to play my own stuff when it comes to this. EMMA WARREN So how does that fit into your angry/hard spectrum? DJ MAGIC MIKE Not really angry, not really hard, just kind of groovy. EMMA WARREN What did you have to do to that bassline to make it sound that way? DJ MAGIC MIKE We did all kinds of stuff to that. The bassline came out of my MS-20. This is an old machine, you have to sit and play and tweak. Once I got my sound, I took it and ran it through my BBE to just kind of fill it up and then bottom-end it out. I ran it from there to my Avalon, just to compress it. Once I compressed it, then we recorded it. TORSTEN SCHMIDT What was your first feeling when you played it in your car? DJ MAGIC MIKE I loved it. When I did the song, it was just a joke. The cowbell thing was like a phrase we were going through at home. I did it for my MC because we always joked about it. When we played our show at the House Of Blues, I said to myself: “I’m gonna surprise him with this one.” I played it and he just started laughing on stage because it started off as a joke song. Now I gave it to a couple of key DJs at home. And they have been playing it. The cowbell buzz is out, everyone wants the song. EMMA WARREN Did you shift bass into a new direction with this track? DJ MAGIC MIKE It’s not bass. It’s more so what I like and I’m into. I just tried to make it an universal thing. If you like it: cool. If you don’t, well, there’s other music to listen to. I’m not going to push what I’m into to everyone, unless you come to one of my gigs, then you have no choice. It’s just what I like. I hear a lot of songs that I don’t like and I tend not to play those, so I like to record my own. And when I play out, I play my own stuff. So people have something to look forward to when they come to my shows. TORSTEN SCHMIDT How did you feel like when people like James Lavelle approached you a couple of years ago? He was someone of the crate-digging kind trying to reclaim some street credibility by putting bass music into the limelight. DJ MAGIC MIKE That’s a whole different story. Boy... You have to know the music in order to do the music. When I say “do the music” that means: whether you are recording it or whether you are selling it, you have to understand the music and where it came from. And if you don’t, it makes it hard to sell it because it’s kind of off the beaten path and no one is really used to it. For the average consumer, this music just doesn’t make sense. It can be quite difficult to sell this sound. So that’s pretty much what happened in that situation. TORSTEN SCHMIDT How do you learn about the music? DJ MAGIC MIKE Learning is hard. It’s more about the feeling. If you listen to it and you like it, you tend to get more into it. If you listen to it and don’t like, then you don’t get into it. But my thing is: you can listen to me or not listen to me as long as you know me. That’s all that really matters to me. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Don’t talk, just listen. DJ MAGIC MIKE Yeah. How did you know about that? [laughs] TORSTEN SCHMIDT Your MC, that’s another universe as well, especially if you’re not in the classic hip-hop situation. DJ MAGIC MIKE If you only knew... TORSTEN SCHMIDT How does the interaction work? DJ MAGIC MIKE Our interaction is not like the usual MC/DJ interaction. It is a show. When we show up and perform, it is a physical show. We like to entertain the crowd and give them something to get into, participate and just have a good time. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Can we get the karaoke bits to get a better idea? DJ MAGIC MIKE It’s hard to describe. He knows me and I know him. I know what he’s going to do before he does it and the other way round. Most of the time, he’s on the front of the stage, I’m on the back of the stage, not even looking at him. I’ll turn the music off, and in that very moment he’s going to say something. People get amazed and ask us: “How did you know?” TORSTEN SCHMIDT An experienced couple. DJ MAGIC MIKE Right. It’s a great show. It’s just fun. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Do you have that on video? DJ MAGIC MIKE Yes, actually we do have videos on my website. Condensed versions of our shows, because a show is usually two hours long, depending on what we’re playing. It’s on www.djmagicmike.com. It’s just a cool show. We like all kinds of different music. He knows hip hop, I know hip hop, he knows drum ‘n’ bass, I know drum ‘n’ bass, he knows nu school, I know nu school. We like the same music – which is important. We like the same artists, we hate the same artists. AUDIENCE MEMBER When you are making your tracks, do you make them specifically for the dancefloor? DJ MAGIC MIKE Not really. I think about the dancefloor, if it’s something that I want to play out. But I tend not to think about that anymore. I tend to just do what I like. If I can fit it in – fine. If not, then I have to like it first. AUDIENCE MEMBER And when you’re DJing, do you keep the different sounds that the crowd responds really well to at the back of your mind? DJ MAGIC MIKE Not really. When I’m working on stuff I specifically try not to make my next song sound like the one before. If I notice that I’m going into the same bank of sounds, then I just forget that day. I try not to gravitate to something that I’m used to. Whenever I go to my computer or keyboard, I make sure that I’m using something different. AUDIENCE MEMBER Besides testing the tracks in your car, is there another place where you test your music? DJ MAGIC MIKE In my house now because I can knock stuff off the walls now. AUDIENCE MEMBER Do you have a special person that you test it with? DJ MAGIC MIKE No. AUDIENCE MEMBER Do you like to go to a certain place, like a hip hop bar or something, and test it there on a shitty soundsystem just to see how it responds or on a good one to feel the bass? DJ MAGIC MIKE I have a very close friend. He’s DJing at the House Of Blues on Sunday nights. Every once in a while when I get a track done, I take it there and let him play it on that massive soundsystem. Then I just listen to it and make sure that it’s where I need it to be. Most of the time, I don’t let anybody hear anything until it’s totally done. And when I feel it’s totally done, I’ll share it with anyone else. AUDIENCE MEMBER Do you get influenced by what people say? DJ MAGIC MIKE No, that doesn’t bother me at all. I guess, I have been doing that too long now. You kind of get through that whole thing. Nothing fazes me, just whatever, whatever. AUDIENCE MEMBER At the height of bass music’s popularity, there were a lot of producers, especially in Atlanta, who were just making the music because it was selling at that time. Once it became commercial, did you feel like they weren’t appreciating the actual history of bass music, or like they didn’t understand where it came from and what the purpose was? DJ MAGIC MIKE Yeah, actually you’re right. You’re very accurate in that. A lot of people tried not to acknowledge the music, the sales or what I had done. You kind of say after a minute: “Was it worth it?” But as long as I was able to take care of myself and people around me, then usually it’s alright at that point. I don’t like how Atlanta went about doing bass music because they jumped on and then they jumped off because it wasn’t going where they wanted it to go. It goes back to what I said before: you have to know the music in order to do the music. A month ago, I got pissed off real bad. I read in Ebony magazine that Nelly was the first artist to put two albums out at the same day. I got really pissed because people are not really paying attention to history. I already did that in ’93. If people don’t pay attention to the history, then its not going to live. AUDIENCE MEMBER How is the bass response different between cassette and CD? Does that change the sound a lot? DJ MAGIC MIKE Oh yeah, drastically. Believe it or not, you can get a lower response for bass on a cassette than on a CD. The CD doesn’t reproduce it the way it needs to be done. But it’s still clear, you can get it louder on CD which overcompensates for the depth loss. TORSTEN SCHMIDT When we’re talking tapes, there’s always a big voodoo about mastering. Do you go all digital or do you include tapes somewhere along the line? DJ MAGIC MIKE I used to, but the more you process it now, the less you have to go to tape. Everything I used to do as far as it goes to bass was to bounce everything to a half inch and go as fast as possible, maybe to 30 Hz. To make sure that it had my tape quality, I would bounce everything and then go to a DAT. If I’m doing something like that now, I get everything to my Avalon. Once I got everything tweaked the way I want it, it’s still all on the digital field. Then I’m doing the master. The bass isn’t as deep as naturally going to tape, but it’s so close now that the average ear can’t pick it up. People won’t even know it. Audience Member Recently I was talking to Barbara Tucker, American house singer, and we spoke about drum & bass, how drum & bass can't grow bigger in New York at least because of ethnic structure of listeners. We compared it to London. Do you think that drum & bass can be as big of a genre as house, techno, maybe trance, in New York or any big city in the USA? DJ Magic Mike I think so but I'm prone to it. Realistically probably not, just cause it's so different and it's off the beaten path, you know? And house is almost like a universal music, you know? I like stuff off the beaten path so when it gets to house music I get bored. I can listen to it for a hot minute and after that I'm like, "OK." I need something to pick me up and keep me going. And I think that's probably pretty much the general thing with house versus drum & bass. D&b is just off the beaten path. So if you like d&b then you like d&B, if you don't like d&b then you're not going to like it, you know? But once again if it is played right and people present it in a nice way, in a decent way, and just try to pull you into it, then it's okay. Cause we've done it, we've changed people that were hardcore hip-hop heads and made them like d&b. It's all in how you do it, and how you play it. Torsten Schmidt When you're talking drum & bass, and you said earlier, you know your drum & bass, obviously you can hear, as you said before a bit of Reinforced in there, now and then from your perspective, what are you top five pre-'94 hardcore classics? DJ Magic Mike [laughs] Audience Member I wanna hear this one! DJ Magic Mike You know 'em all already. Well, he knows what number one is. "World Within a World," Omni Trio. "Renegade Snares," the "Hey Jude" bootleg... Audience Member [inaudible] DJ Magic MIke What's that? "Wonders Of The World"? Yeah, yeah, "Trip to the Moon," it is quite a few things that we like. Where were we at and I played, we ended our set... Once again, I surprised him, dug through my wall and started pulling out all kinds of old '91, '92 jungle and then we ended our set with it. And just tripped people out cause they weren't suspecting it. Audience Member [inaudible] Torsten Schmidt That is a bit of a scenario, playing '91 hardcore tunes in Alabama. What was that like? Audience Member North Carolina? DJ Magic Mike It might've been North Carolina. Cause I mean that song was a "Sesame Street." [laughs] Yeah it was. Emma Warren What was the response from the dance floor when you did that? DJ Magic Mike They lost their minds. Because either they had never heard it, or remembered it. So usually your response is, you know, hands up and everybody having a good time, and that's what it was. We ended the set with it and they enjoyed it. Audience Member America wasn't as harsh on that record as they overseas was, truthfully. As I just jump into the conversation. Torsten Schmidt Do you have to put like extra low end on to these records when you play them these days? DJ Magic Mike No, just leave it as it is. Just leave it. Cause they are all original records, they are all originals. Which he is surprised I even have. I just leave it as it is. Every once in awhile I might turn the low end up on the EQ on the mixer but I tend to like the original sound of the record. So I tend not to overcompensate or push anything. I just leave it as it is. Emma Warren So what was your feeling about those records at the time? DJ Magic Mike Well that was at the height of my bass career. So once again, off the beaten path. It was different than what I was into and what I was doing. I wasn't playing it, it was just like I would go to a record store and it was just something cool, like, "I like that." And I'd buy it and I wouldn't play it but I would listen to it. That's how my collection just continued to grow. So when he started bringing up these records, and I'm like "I think I have that," you know? He was like, "You don't have that record," and I would go home and I would start digging and all of the sudden I'd find it. I think the last thing we did that with was the original soundtrack Omni Trio Volume Three. Was it three or four? Three? Yeah. He was like, "You don't have that record," and I'm like, "That sounds familiar to me." Then sure enough I went home and I started digging and I found it and gave it to him and he's been happy ever since. Torsten Schmidt Did you ever meet any of the guys? DJ Magic Mike Never met them. Torsten Schmidt Is there anyone you would like to meet? DJ Magic Mike No. [laughs] you know what, I'll explain that. I've always liked to meet people, whether they were artists, entertainers, or whatever. What wound up happening is, I would meet people that I liked their music, was into their music. And then once you meet them, their whole attitude determines how you feel about them at that point. Torsten Schmidt Top three disapointments? DJ Magic Mike Oh boy, I certainly don't want to put that out there. How can we get away from that. Let's skip that, if I have nothing good to say about someone I'd rather just let it be. But I've met people and been huge fans, and met them and they were assholes. It turns me totally off from them and then I don't want to listen to their music anymore, and I have nothing good to say. Torsten Schmidt How long does it usually take you to overcome it? DJ Magic Mike Never. Never, never. I never play it again, and I just say, "Whoops, that's that." I'm not a groupie, so it's like I want to shake your hand, I want to like it, I like your music, "Good job" or whatever so don't be a snob about it, you know? That tends to happen quite often. Torsten Schmidt How do you keep yourself from not being a snob about it while you get that sort of attention? DJ Magic Mike Cause we all play records for a living. We play with machines and we play records, you know? We aren't building rockets, were not doing any of that. So it's just a hobby for most people, everybody is into it. So there's no reason to be that way. I enjoy meeting people, I enjoy talking to people, it's always a fun thing for me. Torsten Schmidt But how about wrong timing? We're experts when it comes it to that. DJ Magic Mike Well you know, when someone meets you, in their book there isn't a wrong time, and we go through that all the time. I can be using the bathroom and somebody's like, "Hey how you doin!?" And they want to shake your hand. Or you could be sitting, eatting dinner, whatever, but it took me a long time to realize that person would probably never see you ever again in life. So then you have to remember that and just chock it up, be nice. Torsten Schmidt Wash your hands. DJ Magic Mike Right. Because if you are nice to them, then you will have a fan for life. If you're an asshole to them, then you will probably have an enemy for life. Cause that's how I am. Emma Warren They'll go home and say, "I'm never playing his records ever again." DJ Magic Mike Right, "I'll never buy another Magic Mike record ever again." So you know, it's just nice to be, just be polite. A minute out of your time, two minutes out of your time, be cool about it, then all of the sudden, "Oh man he was cool." And then everybody is all happy. Audience Member [inaudible] DJ Magic Mike Yeah, I can name quite a few actually. Some of them start turning around, after the fact, after you've done something or they need something. Then all of the sudden they want to talk and I'm like, "Nah, no thanks." That's how it is. I don't want to say no names. We'll let that be. Audience Member It sounds like you've, over the years, embraced computer production and technology. I'm just curious as to how it's influenced your style and sound over the years? DJ Magic Mike Changed it totally, actually. I went from the days of laying one track on a 24-inch tape, and making track one SMPTE and having to lock up to that for three, four, five passes to keep laying stuff in. Technology can ruin you also, because you tend to over produce, you tend to experiment more because you have the technology. It changed my style totally. From what I did back then to what I'm into now and what I want to do now. But sometimes I have to get a grasp and say, "OK, that's enough." This one song I did I got extremely technical on and it took me probably about a week. And I'm just sitting and tweaking and having fun and there's only so much stuff you can do before you start over producing. That was the problem I started running into. Coming from the days of just drum machine and playing a synth on top of it, or running a record on top of a beat, to where it is now it is just a night and day difference. There's not a lot of people that can experience both. Either they were doing something back then, they're not doing it now. So, it's a change, it really is. It was a learning curve at first because I've always liked equipment, and tweaking and getting in and playing. Now where it is it's just how nasty can I make this sound? And that's where it is. Torsten Schmidt So maybe another tune? But not before we give the man a big hand for sharing with us. [applause] Later on, when we go to our little studio you can show how you’re doing on the decks in the meantime? DJ MAGIC MIKE Yeah, I’ll play around a little bit. This is the song I was talking about when I got a little bit too technical, but it’s fun. (music: Magic Mike – “unknown” / applause) TORSTEN SCHMIDT I wonder how do we’ve made it to get through all of this without talking about mixtapes and compilations? That’s where you're coming from, right? DJ MAGIC MIKE I kind of started with mixtapes. But when I started out, they weren’t called mixtapes. It was just you playing in a club and selling your tapes at the end of the night. This was back in ‘81/’82. I recorded probably three or four tapes in the course of a night. And at the end of the night I would sell them. But then the demand started to get bigger. So I bought more cassette decks, made master tapes, started duplicating them at home and took them to the club. People didn’t want a tape from the night. They just wanted a tape from me. But once I started making records, I stopped doing mixtapes. My last two projects were like a trip back to the mixtapes. The Bootyz In Motion one went through Interscope and did 300,000 copies, part two went through K-Tel. This did 250,000 copies. They want me to do a third CD, but I said that there are not enough songs left. But if I find enough obscure bass songs that people have forgotten about, I’m going to do another one. EMMA WARREN What’s the key thing to do a really, really killer mixtape? DJ MAGIC MIKE In the States, mixtapes have lost their meaning now. It was something DJs used to do to showcase their skills. But now, when you hear a mixtape, it’s just exclusive songs people get their hands on or that they have done themselves and aren’t released yet. Anybody who can hold a mic is doing that. For me, that’s not a mixtape. MCs are just rhyming on top of instrumentals, once they have 12 or 13 of those, that’s their mixtape. The word just doesn’t have the same meaning to me. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Are these people missing out on skills somewhat? DJ MAGIC MIKE No, they’re not missing out on skills, you’re not getting skills at all. Where it started at and where it is – that’s just two totally different places now. When it started it was about DJs showing their skills. A DJ could show what he was doing, get his name out and make some money at the same time. Now it’s an MC thing. To me, it’s just kind of weird. I don’t listen to them unless a DJ gave it to me and said: “This is my mixtape,” or whatever. Most of the time, when a DJ gives something to me, I’ll listen to it. Because I never know when I’m going to run into him again. I want to be able to say: “This is cool, but such and such,” or that I don’t like it. But now mixtapes have not the same meaning. They are all MCs yelling and doing whatever they do. You don’t hear a lot of DJs making mixtapes anymore, unless it’s somebody like Flex or DJ Clue. But I don’t classify them as DJs. TORSTEN SCHMIDT Will a DJ be able to reclaim the spotlight? DJ MAGIC MIKE I say yes. But you got to want it. If you’re after to get it, then you can. But don’t assume that it’s going to happen just because you’re a DJ. I think that’s part of the problem now. If you’re afraid about it, you have no talent. Then just come up with something else. AUDIENCE MEMBER When doing a mixtape, is it better to keep it short and sweet or make one that is 45 minutes or an hour long? Would you listen to a one hour mixtape? Or is it better too keep it at 15 or 20 minutes? DJ MAGIC MIKE I think it’s a personal preference. Some people want to hear more, some want to hear less. I want to hear talent. I don’t care if the song is there or not. You can go from mix to mix and take the whole song out. I just want to hear what you did. And that’s pretty much where your talent comes from. I don’t want to hear the song I might have heard 15 million times already. I want to hear what you can do with it. In an hour you can get a good gauge of how a person’s talents are and where the talents lie. AUDIENCE MEMBER Would you listen to the whole hour? DJ MAGIC MIKE I’d scan through the songs until it’s time for the mix. That’s usually where the talent lies. I’m more technical. I want to hear you put some thought into it. I don’t want to hear just going from one song to the next with a little 16 beats mix. That’s nothing to me. Put some thought into something. Put some songs together that I wouldn’t expect to go together. AUDIENCE MEMBER Talking about the technical aspects, much probably you have heard more tracks than we have. But is it only about mixing skills? Or can that tune selction maybe go above standards and arouse your interest? DJ MAGIC MIKE Sometimes you can hear a DJ that can’t mix to save his life, but his track selections are great. But to me, if ‘DJ’ is in your name, then you should have the craft. I’m a hard ass when it comes to that. It’s just because I’ve been around such a long time. I know what I like, I know what I don’t like, what I’m going to get into and what not. So I’m more the technical person. I want to hear what you’ve done; more so than just hear the songs. TORSTEN SCHMIDT So what are the 36 chambers to go through to earn that ‘DJ’ in your name? DJ MAGIC MIKE Number one, first and foremost: be original. I don’t want to hear something that you heard the guy at the club do last Friday. If you want to sit up and mock or copy somebody, that’s fine. But use that talent to further yourself and don’t use that talent to make yourself. Use it and incorporate it in a different way, in a way the average person wouldn’t think of. But people don’t want to give it though anymore. They want to study a tape or listen to someone and copy it exactly, word for word. And suddenly they can do it. But that’s not talent. That’s just doing what you’ve learnt. EMMA WARREN So you’re definitely representing for DJ skills. DJ MAGIC MIKE Of course.

---

Title: Domu
Date: 2015-04-21
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/domu-ruling-the-breaks-breaking-the-rules/

Domu
Dominic Stanton is the real name behind many mysterious pseudonyms: Bakura, Rima, Sonar Circle, Umod, Yotoko. While Sonar Circle was the first nickname Dominic gave himself when experimenting with drum & bass on the legendary Reinforced label around ’96, he has made Domu his main guise, with releases on labels such as 2000 Black, Archive, Ninja Tune, Sonar Kollektiv, Compost, and Rush Hour. Domu’s music is full of bold rhythms and detailed arrangements, right down to the homemade egg shaker. In this lecture at the 2004 Red Bull Music Academy, the Bedford-bred hardcore breaks fan talks us through the history of jacking ragga and rave, how Reinforced’s drum & bass twisted into broken beat and how to keep delivering fresh tunes that you ain’t never heard before.
Hosted by Nick Dwyer He’s Dominic to his mum, but you might know him as Domu, you might know him as Rima, with Enrico aka Volcov who you saw earlier, as a DJ, as Sonar Circle, the drum & bass producer – and I’m not even going to try and list the others ‘cause there’s millions and I’d get lost. Are you well? Domu I’m okay. Nick Dwyer I think a good idea would be to play a Domu track you’ve done, that would be a good way to show people what you’re about. Domu Well, I’ll play the vocal [version] of this. (music: Unforscene – “Don’t You Worry”) Nick Dwyer As you said before, you’re a breakdown man and you said you’re a bit of a rave kid. Going right back for you, it all came from the DJing side of things, and you started DJing very young, at 14years old. Tell us about those times. Domu Well, I wasn’t really into anything as a teenager. I was really rubbish at sport and generally quite quiet at school, so DJing was a great thing you could learn on your own and not have to show anyone until you were kind of good and you’re kind of happy with it. So when I was 14 and there was nothing else really going on, I pushed myself into music, and really before that I had no interest in music at all. I’d played with toys until the age of 12 and I was just in fantasy world, and then DJing and music came along, and it was jungle and hardcore and rave and it was a really exciting time in British music, and I was just at the age where I understood it completely. It meant something to me. It had elements of teen angst and it had this drug culture thing with it as well, it was all quite rebellious. Because in the late ‘80s there was the acid thing that happened, and I read about in the newspapers about the acid house parties, and the middle classes were up in arms about it, and it had a kind of teenage rebellion appeal to it. Nick Dwyer So ‘92, ‘93, musically within that whole spectrum, what were the labels, the DJs, and the parties that stood out for you? Domu It started as illegals from the late ‘80s, but into the early ‘90s, around the M25 [motorway] outside of London, there was a big middle England commuter belt of young people that started doing illegal raves in warehouses, like Exodus and Raindance and things like this, and they were all free parties. I’m from Bedfordshire, which is around London, it’s a shire around London, and this scene was really created out of lots of young people who didn’t have any clubs or anything relevant to themselves. The DJs who were playing at these illegal scenes just became household names for the kids who were swapping tapes at school. So the first tape I had was a Grooverider tape from what was that club he used to do with Goldie? Nick Dwyer Rage. Domu Yeah, Rage. A Grooverider Rage tape. And then it went on from there, because ‘92 was the summer of the big raves, Dreamscape and all the big things like that. And also you had the rave stuff in the charts like The Prodigy and Altern8, so it was all there to piece together and become part of it. Nick Dwyer Was this the stage where you had people like Carl Cox? Domu Well, then there was no boundary, but now we have jungle, drum & bass, tech-step, happy hardcore, whatever — everything is genre-fied and put into a little box. But back then, in those golden days [laughs] it wasn’t as segregated. Carl Cox used to play a rough kind of Amen [break] bleepy rave track and then play a really stupid chipmunk record [sings high-pitched melody], you know, with fast pianos, and it was all the same thing because it was a primitive music and it hadn’t been established. Though there is some rubbish in that, it does make for a quite honest scene. Nick Dwyer For you as a producer now, your palette is wide and varied. Was this born out of this whole early rave ethos – whether it was four-to-the-floor or some dirty Belgian R&S style thing, you were all into it? Domu Thing is, I’ve never really done drugs. And I was 14 or 15 at this point, so I wasn’t doing acid or doing Es and going off my head and raving, because I was too young. I was just interested in the fusion element of it, because I grew up listening to my mum listening to soul, Tamla Motown and reggae, and my older sister listening to electro and hip-hop. I could hear that these things were included here, and this whole acid thing that I’d heard a bit of, and there was just a point where they all met, but it was none of them. It was something truly new, and that’s a point in music, a point in time that it’s hard to hit. I mean, maybe it’s happening now for young people, but because I was young at that time, it meant something to me. Nick Dwyer Now you’ve got a record here, a 4hero one, that’s a good example of this whole time, this whole era. Domu In a way it’s past this era. I wouldn’t mind starting before that, actually. I’ll start with this Ragga Twins, because there was a fusion – there was hip-house in the late ‘80s, which was kind of relevant to people who liked jacking Chicago and New York house music with rapping over the top, like Doug Lazy and things like that. But the British version was to be a bit more ragga and a bit more jumpy. (music: Ragga Twins – “Juggling”) Then on the same record… [cues up B-side] (music: Ragga Twins – “Wipe The Needle”) It’s all quite primitive stuff, but that was a time when there was no name for it, it was just music for music’s sake. Nick Dwyer That’s on Shut Up And Dance. How influential was Shut Up and Dance at this point in time? Domu Well, Reinforced is a label that means a lot to me, and I think if there wasn’t Shut Up And Dance, I truly don’t think there’d be Reinforced. I think they looked at each other at that time, in the early stages, and vibed a lot off each other. “Mr Kirk’s Nightmare” was the big 4hero thing, but Shut Up And Dance were around in ‘87, ‘88 and were experimenting with a similar sort of thing, and it’s this kind of north-west London sound. Nick Dwyer When did you make the transition from 14- or 15-year-old eager to rave it up to actually getting on the turntables and getting active DJing? Domu It was the height of the jungle thing, like summer of ‘92. I was 14 and I just got some Soundlab [decks] and a basic two-channel mixer and just stayed in and learnt it, listened to the jungle tapes and bought jungle records. But then I found Reinforced, and Reinforced really opened my eyes to a world away from ragga jungle, with their kind of scientific angle. It was a lot more grown-up. (music: 4hero – “Mr. Kirk’s Nightmare”) I’d listen to that and would think, "How the hell did they do that?” Nick Dwyer Time-stretching? Domu It’s time-stretching. But in 1992, it wasn’t time-stretching. Nick Dwyer That was one of the first records that... Domu They had a Harmonizer. They hired this machine called a [H-3000] Harmonizer, which just played it up at different pitches. With time-stretching you can achieve the same thing, which I later found out. But equipment then was so limited and so basic. I mean, everyone here has access to a computer with umpteen [gigabytes] of memory. The samplers they were using then, the Akai S950, had two-and-a-quarter megabytes. Maximum. That was flat-out, fully loaded. And people who made music before then will tell you, “Yeah? Well, I used to use a sampler that you had to pedal to use,” and things like that. [laughs] “Yeah, well, I didn’t even have a sampler, I had to make it all on a guitar.” But, you know, everyone has a tale whereby they were more hard done by than the generation [after]. But it was really, really difficult to make technical-sounding, advanced music. They were a real inspiration to me, because they were just taking it [further]. They had all these jazz-funk and space-funk influences that I had no idea what it was, they had all these Detroit influences. Nick Dwyer For people out there that don’t know, tell us about Reinforced Records and its importance. Domu Well, Shut Up and Dance was very influential, DJ Hype was with them at the start and it was very early breakbeat-ragga-fusion-electro-acid music, and Reinforced was really a very similar thing. Reinforced had some big records that charted, like [Manix’s] “Head in the Clouds” and things like that, and they sold a lot of records, like 20 or 30,000. They had a 7” single that went in the charts. I mean, “Mr Kirk’s Nightmare” sold hundreds of thousands, but they got a bit ripped off with that. But it was the template for me, for the attitude and the direction of British breakbeat music at that time. Nick Dwyer Ironically enough, that was the first label you released stuff through. How did you go from DJing [to producing]? Domu Well, at this stage — this is late ‘92, early ‘93 — I’d just got an Amiga 500 or something. At that time it was Atari STs and Amiga 500s. And I had an 8-bit sampler soundcard thing that you could plug into the back and you could make demos on it, you know? I used to get Amens and Apaches [breaks] and loop them up and get tone basses and start learning how to chop breaks on the dirtiest imaginable 8-bit... Actually, it might have even been 2-bit sound, literally [laughs]. Nick Dwyer Still dirty, though. Domu Oh, it was a dirty sound. But there was a guy, Bizzy B, who used to release records made on an Amiga, and Mickey Finn and Aphrodite had a big tune made on an Amiga. Nick Dwyer There’s also a guy, Paradox, who still uses one. Domu It’s very basic stuff. But I made some demos, sent them to Reinforced. Well, I sent them to three places: Reinforced, Vinyl Distribution, which was a big hub for lots of hardcore drum & bass labels, and La Bello Blanco, which was another kind of biggish label. Reinforced and Vinyl got back to me and said, “OK, come in for a chat,” and Reinforced were just the most down to earth. Vinyl were saying, “Right, we need you to learn how to play the keyboard, and we need you to cut your hair, and you need to be like this.” And I was 16, I just wanted to make records and put them out. I realized quite young that making records was the only way to get on DJing. All I wanted was my own music to swap with people and to get into the circle. Because the drum & bass scene, the jungle scene, to me as a kid… I wanted to be in there doing it. I wanted to be on the scene, on the circuit. I wanted to be a superstar DJ making rinse-out tunes and living the life, like Andy C, and I quickly realized that wasn’t going to happen. Andy C did “Long Dark Tunnel,” which was a massive jungle tune everywhere, and that kind of allowed him into the scene. “Right, Andy, you’re in!” And that was it. But from then on, I don’t remember anyone, up to maybe Alex Reece or Ed Rush & Optical, being allowed into the scene to DJ on the strength of a record. Certainly not just a DJ making it up through the ranks to be a superstar drum & bass DJ. That’s all I wanted, and I realized quite early on that wasn’t going to happen. So I just started making music, and the people at Reinforced, 4hero, were very honest about the music you made. I mean, I’ve had my dreams shattered by them, with a piece of music that I’ve thought was the best in the world. I’d take it into them, sit there and play it to them — “Nah, I don’t like it.” And I’m like, “Right, what do I do now? I’m just gonna give up.” Because they were my heroes, they were my inspiration, they were like everything, and they were taking the time to give me criticism and put my records out. All I wanted to do was to get on in there. Nick Dwyer Was it refreshing to see Marc and Dego didn’t have this whole drum & bass circuit attitude? Domu Well, that made me realize I wasn’t going to make it, because Reinforced was this outside thing. Reinforced was Reinforced, and then there was the rest of the drum & bass scene. So their attitude really rubbed off on me, and to sort of say, “You know what? I can just be one of those people and make those rinse-out tunes and go that route, but you’re not going to make a mark, and you’re not going to get in there, because you’ll just be doing the same thing.” So from that point I kind of realized you have to go against the grain if you want to be noticed. Nick Dwyer Tell us about Sonar Circle, obviously you took a few more tracks to them and they noticed. Domu Yeah, I had one 12" and then a year passed trying to find what that sound was, and that didn’t work, so I found another one. So that was a year later and another 12", and I had a track on Enforcers, which was the big Reinforced compilation that they did sporadically. Nick Dwyer Nice picture disc, too. Domu Yeah, nice picture disc, that made them quite famous. But at this stage, I was trying to make drum & bass with a different edge and it became increasingly hard, because the scene was changing. DJs weren’t playing what Reinforced was making, and we were just becoming more and more obscure. It wasn’t drum & bass anymore, we’d sort of become something else. But I’ll play you a track from that period. This is called “Us And Them.” (music: Sonar Circle – “Us and Them”) Nick Dwyer You say this got released in 1998, and around this time the whole drum & bass scene had become very formulaic – the whole tech-step thing. Whereas Reinforced was always coming from that breakbeat science point of view of editing drums. Domu Also fusing live instruments. [4hero’s 1998 album] Two Pages had happened and I was obviously very influenced by that, and I wanted to seem like I was being more musical and more thoughtful. But with equipment limitations and knowledge limitations, I don’t feel like I got it across at that point. I mean, I’m happy about how it all went, but that whole album is peppered with different tempos and tempo changes. Nick Dwyer What’s the album called, for people out there? Domu The album was Radius, an album I did on Reinforced. It’s long gone now, you’ll never find that [laughs]. Nick Dwyer Was it disheartening to see an entire scene, that you had invested so much time and passion and late night trips to some rave three hours from Bedford, go down this narrow-minded route? Domu I was shattered. I was a fan. I was a DJ and a fan of this music, and it was like six or seven years of my life that just doesn’t mean anything anymore. I had a huge collection of drum & bass and jungle records that I just looked at and thought, “That’s it, I’ve cut it off. I’m gonna cut that point there and it stops and I’ll move on my way, ’cause there’s nothing…” Well, there’s the odd tune now. There’s artists like Paradox, Fracture & Neptune, Cartridge, Marcus Intalex and people like that that are still kind of pushing it, but pushing it within a kind of frame. There’s always this tempo barrier, always this structure barrier that makes drum & bass what it is. Nick Dwyer The breakdown goes there... Domu Exactly, and that’s really my problem with it. If you’re influenced by other music, you’re not really free to make all of the different music or include all of the different music you like at one point. So, I couldn’t be part of it, I couldn’t try and kid myself that I was just going to let it go. Nick Dwyer Obviously this album takes a wide range of influences, and at this point in time you’re using live instrumentation Domu A little bit, yeah. Nick Dwyer Was this period still strictly Sonar Circle? Domu That was the point that I started to think, “You know what? I don’t think I can be just Sonar Circle.” Because I’d had seven or eight records out, I can’t remember how old I was – six years ago I was 20 and I wanted to make more of a go of it. And I met Enrico through Dollis Hill and Enrico had just done... Nick Dwyer When you say Dollis Hill...? Domu Dollis Hill was the base of Reinforced Records. Enrico was going there, that’s when he lived in England, and Dego was about to start 2000Black and Enrico had just started Archive and he’d heard Radius, and he said, “Well, I like this midtempo, weird stuff that you’re doing, why don’t you do some for my label?” And I did one for Dego, for 2000Black, which is the first Domu thing. Shall I play that? And then shortly afterwards, I did one for Archive and kind of found a base in Archive. Nick Dwyer And Archive as we learnt before is Enrico’s label. And this came out in 1999? Domu 1999, yeah. And it’s called “Dressed To Ill.” (music: Domu – “Dressed To Ill”) I look back at that and kind of keep that as the benchmark for what I’m trying to achieve. There’s a certain amount of naivety in that. My thing is beats, I program beats a lot of the time and that’s what I started doing, but playing keys is another element, writing songs is another element. But the keys thing... The key playing in that is quite naive, but there’s something about it that I like, its rawness and its untutored-ness, which is really what I’m about. You can know too much about music, you can know too many rules, and that’s really what this whole thing is about, it’s about rules. You can start to break rules once you understand them, but I think you have a far wider scope if you never actually learn the rules – because there’s never a boundary. And once you start saying to yourself, “OK, it doesn’t really sound like house,” well, then that’s what it is. There should be more of that with modern music making. Nick Dwyer Was it pretty strange feeling for you at this stage going from doing Sonar Circle, and you’re even struggling to get people to play this form of drum & bass, to making this record that sounded so fresh and new, and all of a sudden you’ve got people like Gilles Peterson and Patrick Forge going, “Oh yeah!” Domu Well, not all of a sudden, I’ll hold you up there [laughs]. It was quite a long and arduous journey. But yeah, a whole other world started to open up to me from that point. There were people who were open-minded, there were DJs that had spent their adult life fighting for a cause, which was this type of music, which is eclectic music. I was lucky to be around at that time when people from lots of different genres were breaking away from whatever their genre was because of the closed-mindedness of it. You know, you have people like
IG Culture
who was in an acid jazz, hip-hop thing, he worked with Young Disciples, he had a thing called Dodge City Productions, which was a big-ish British hip-hop act. You had Phil Asher, who was a UK house producer, kind of losing his way a bit. You had Marc and Dego, 4hero drum & bass producers, losing their way a bit and they were like elder statesmen. They’ve all had big deals, they all know how the business works and they started to talk about doing something else. Nick Dwyer It wasn’t just Marc and Dego from Reinforced... Domu Well, we were all there as well, you know? I mean, Seiji and G Force were there as well, and they later went on work with Orin and Kaidi and Daz to make Bugz [In The Attic]. But Bugz was kind of bubbling when we were at Reinforced at that time. Seiji would say to me, “You know, you should really do some of this stuff for Bugz,” and I’d be like, “What’s Bugz?” And even at this stage, Goya, the distributor that Enrico talked about, had a label called People Records which made, at the start of this scene, very influential records from IG Culture and people like that. And they’d already been out in 1998, and I’d missed them because I didn’t know where I was going, I didn’t know what my direction was. I kind of liked Jazzanova, I kind of liked 4hero, and I kind of liked Hefner and people like this that were being different, but there was no umbrella, there was no name for it. And now, if you want to know what it is, it’s called broken beat, but I look back at that period of ‘98, ‘99 and much prefer it then, because it wasn’t called anything, people were just making music and you had to go and find it. Nick Dwyer Was there a good support network, as such? Everyone was supporting each other? Domu Well, there wasn’t really, it was just people with similar ideas. It’s like people here working together. They’d be like, “Right, OK, we’ll do this,” and everyone would be really excited and buzzing because there’s no structure. But imagine if we all lived here for three years, we’d do each others’ heads in after a little while. “I don’t want to play on the flute today. Just leave me alone.” [laughter] And that kind of happens in a scene. It’s the same thing. You don’t live together but you see each other everyday, you talk about music everyday and it just wears you down. And in a way I can see how scenes like the UK drum & bass scene... There’s no one at the center of a scene saying, “I’m gonna take this scene there, and I’m going to control it.” It’s just a bunch of people making music, and it can go wrong, And it quite often does. So in a way, you’re better off on your own thinking about what you’re doing with someone you can really trust, rather than entrusting your faith to the god of broken beat, whoever he may be, you know? [Laughter] Come on, god of broken beat, get me there, get me through. Nick Dwyer At what point did different influences come in, be it Detroit techno or…? Domu That all came from 4hero really, and Enrico. Enrico’s a really big influence on me on the Detroit side. I never really liked any house music, I must say. Sorry, if anyone comes from a house music world, but I really hated it. Because I was a breakbeat boy, you know? I like my breaks. I was a b-boy. I came from UK hip-hop. Well, kind of fast US hip-hop, like late ‘80s, early ‘90s fast US hip-hop, into UK hip-hop, and I like breaks. I like funky breaks from funk tunes, and I didn’t like disco or disco breaks. And it’s only in the last two or three years I’ve really let myself think, “Ah right, you can make nice house music, you can make nice disco-influenced music.” I think it was probably my age, really because I was always so hardcore. It’s like, beats – that’s everything, that’s life. And scratching. Being a producer I just learned to be a bit more open-minded about house music and the subtleties of house music. The same way that hip-hip has subtleties that I had to learn. Every established music has a discipline that you must understand before you can subvert it. Before I could subvert drum & bass, make it different, I had to understand the way that everyone else was doing it. You have to have some kind of idea of the rule that you’re breaking. Nick Dwyer How does this work for you? I mean, obviously your music is covering so many different genres. Are you actively, before you start mucking around with this genre, are you actively going out checking records, checking what’s hot, or whatever? Domu It’s not like I’m some kind of genre prankster or something. “Ha ha, I’ve found a new genre that must be twisted!” I just like what I like and I interpret that in a way that’s trying to be quite honest and pure. You know, I’ve gotten into Brazilian music and I’m going to incorporate that into my music. I’m gotten into techno, so I’ll incorporate some of that. And it’s just trying to make something different. It’s the fusion element where things haven’t been done before. It’s not just like now, having mash-ups – “I’m going to take the ‘Trick Me’ a cappella and put it over Depeche Mode.” That’s not really the same thing. It’s more about mixing your influences and creating something that hasn’t really been done before. Nick Dwyer Tell us a bit more about the Rima project. How did that start to take shape? Domu Rima was born out of the communication that me and Enrico had, talking about Brazilian music and boogie, slow house music and that kind of stuff, and we thought it would be interesting to make an album which fused elements of Latin music with some tracks that were blatant boogie, house tracks. I’ll play a bit. So on one side we did this cover of “Vidigal”. Nick Dwyer How did this work, was this you flying to Verona? Domu We had a couple of sessions together but generally after that we did it by post, which is time-consuming. (music: Rima – “Vidigal”) (music: Rima – “Let It Go”) Domu That was on Compost, well, Jazzanova Compost Records. That was two years ago, so we really should start doing another one. I was a big fan of Jazzanova. They were a very influential act to me at the time when I wasn’t really sure what I was doing. And I was very flattered for them to be interested in having a project with us, and that was the outcome of it. We wanted to have quite a high standard of songs and playing, and have a lot of live playing. Because it is easy for me to slip into studio mode and just jiggle around some sounds and, you know, I can impress the nerds with it. But when you’re trying to write songs, when you are trying to make something appear like you are actually a producer, you have to pull out all the stops and make a bit of an effort. Especially now, as the market is how it is, if you want to be on top of the game you have to have sources that are of a high standard to make a product that is [of a high standard]. Nick Dwyer As well as the Rima project you also have this Kudu project, tell us about that. Domu I was a little bit out of my depth with them. I went to work with Seiji at the Bugz and Mark de Clive-Lowe, who is a keyboard player, and I didn’t really know what I was doing. I was in an environment where I was a bit out of my depth, a bit out of control. I had done some beats, and they did what they did and I kind of sat there and went, “Yeah, that sounds good.” I was quite young and shy. Nick Dwyer How long ago was this? Domu It was like four years ago. It was a bit of a rude awakening. But on the other side of that, just from working with people for one day or two days, watching someone else program, I learned so much about shortcuts, about mixing. I learned a lot. And I hated it because it made me feel really small. It made me feel like I didn’t know what on earth I was doing, because I was in someone else’s environment. But it was one of the most positive things that ever happened to me as a producer. To realize that maybe my way isn’t always the best way, maybe someone else knows how to do it better. As a producer you need to realize that you must always learn. You could be the most thoroughly read, nerdy producer in the world and still someone will come along and show you something that’s more about feel than technical [skill]. “Well, but if you do it like this, it gives it this certain feel…” Nick Dwyer You ended up working with them again on a dance thing? Domu Legends of the Underground, it’s a project that’s in the process of hopefully getting fairly big. It’s a dance display, like modern dance, jazz dance, street dance, with a storyline and visuals that work alongside the dancing. We had to construct the music for it to a storyboard. I did all the beats, Mark de Clive-Lowe did all the music with Bembé Ségué on vocals and a few other musicians. And then Seiji arranged it all and mixed it. They did a half-hour presentation at Paradiso, which is a club in Amsterdam, had a full house and a good reaction. It is just an interesting project, another avenue, having your music relate to something people can go and see and it’s a show. The same way as maybe doing music for television or film. It’s another outlet, it is another avenue for people to hear about you. Nick Dwyer At this point, musically, how many different avenues have you got? How many different hats are you wearing? There are a lot of aliases out there. Domu I only really do it just so I can keep making music. Because if I made a straight hip-hop record as Domu, people would be like, “Yeah, but that’s not Domu.” I can’t make drum & bass as Domu now, it has to be Sonar Circle. I just start building personas, building projects and building possibilities. I don’t like to have all my eggs in one basket. I like to have different projects going in different directions, different labels, different countries, different vibes. So I just have different names and I work with different people. If I do something with Enrico, that has to be Rima. If I do something with my mate [Roberto] Marin that plays bass, that’s for Especial Records, which is a Japanese label, and that [project] is called Bakura. That’s just a name we found on a Star Wars poster, it was just the name of a planet. We were like, “OK, we’ll be called Bakura.” It doesn’t mean anything, but it was the name for that project. Nick Dwyer Aside from going into the studio with a collaborator, where it’s for a certain project, but when you are in the studio by yourself, how does this creative process work? Do you walk in there and go, “Right, I’m going to do an Umod thing now,” or does something just happen along the way? Domu I consciously know that I have to do this new Domu album and I am listening to Domu stuff that I’ve done before and I am thinking, “Right, that is what I was thinking four years ago, so I should maybe try and incorporate that feeling – what I was thinking about then and where would that be now?” So yeah, I do have different frames of mind for each project and I am aware of when a project needs to be resurrected, just in amounts of time. Like Rima was two years ago, so we should start to think about that again soon. But the last Domu album was out three years ago, so I can’t avoid the fact that that has to happen. Nick Dwyer And that’s coming out again on... Domu On Archive. Nick Dwyer Tell us about Umod, because that was released, what? Three or four months ago? Domu Umod was again with Jazzanova on Sonar Kollektiv. Umod is Domu backwards. It doesn’t take a genius to work that out, but lots of people didn’t. It was after a touring experience I had. I toured the States for like three weeks and I felt a bit drained emotionally, because I took in a lot of new influences but I also met a lot of new people and left them quite quickly and it was the first long tour I’d been on. Nick Dwyer How many weeks? Domu It was about 11 gigs and 17 days, which isn’t many. But the thing was, it was 17 days and I went on 17 planes, because a lot of the journeys were broken between two stops. And I don’t fly very well, and it just kind of upset me, really. [Nick Dwyer gives a pat on the back] It’s alright. I wanted to come home and make a record that had some negative energy in it. (music: Umod – “Just 4 Funk Sake”) I spent a lot of that time listening to a lot of Dabrye and Prefuse 73 and things like that. I didn’t want to come home and make a record like that, but I listened to a lot of electronic hip-hop, or IDM, as they call it in the States. It was just another different angle. A big thing for me is making music that actually expresses some kind of emotion. It’s all very well making dance music, but dance music can often be quite flat and monotone. From the music I’ve played, I like it to kind of move, to have different sections. If you have a house record that goes verse-chorus-verse-chorus, just in terms of the music, not vocals or anything, if it has different sections that lead into one another I think it makes for a lot more interesting listening. Because I’m not much of a stoner, and stoned music gets you stuck in there and it loops around and it builds very slowly. I’m all for that at different times, but I don’t work stoned, so I don’t try to make stoner music. I make music that has peaks and troughs. Nick Dwyer For you, how does the creative process work? Do you always start with beats? Domu Generally, but sometimes it can just start with a sound, or a break from a record. You hear a nice Rhodes progression and you think, “I’ll loop that up,” but then I never just loop it up. I’ll replay it and spread it along the keyboard. So it can start with any number of things, really. It rarely starts with an idea in bed, like, “Oh yeah, I just had a great idea for a song.” I’m sitting at the equipment usually. It’s not like writing words down, which you can do on a train. Quite often I do have ideas for tunes on the train, but I haven’t got a laptop, so I just lose them. I wish I could get them back, but... Nick Dwyer What does your studio set-up look like now? You’ve progressed from the Amiga. Domu Well, I have a computer, but I’m not going to say what it is. [Laughs] I still use an E-mu E6400, which was a late ‘90s sampler. I had an MPC for a long time and I didn’t program on it. The whole point of having an MPC or whatever drum machine you have is to use the swing that it creates, but I don’t know how you program on drum machines. I have no idea how you do that. I program on the screen and people say to me, “Wow, you get such great swing,” or, “Sometimes it sounds like you have a live drummer, there’s so much going on.” But if you spend a little time programming drums on the screen, you play it in by hand and then program over the top and it can sound quite intricate quite quickly. Nick Dwyer It would seem that you are fairly productive. You manage to get things out and happening, is this true or false? Domu Well, I work every day. I get up and I work, and that’s it. I wake up in the morning and start making music. Nick Dwyer No lingering, you just get it done. Domu Yeah. Sometimes I’ll go into the studio straight in my pants, just wake up, don’t wash, there’s a massive beard, and realize, “Whoa, I’ve been in here for three weeks.” I’m sure lots of producers are like that. Because my studio is just another room in my house. But if I have an idea at eight at night, I don’t just go and work, because I live in the world with my girlfriend and I live in normal time, so I don’t just go and work. I work [during] work hours, so it creates a regime for myself. I know I am most creative in the morning, I am most creative until midday. I’ve done all the boring programming stuff in the morning, then it’s just creativity between 12 to three, and then at three o’clock I start to dip because I am getting hungry or something. Nick Dwyer You’ve been touring a lot recently. Has touring given you inspiration musically? Domu Well, the Umod album is a good example of that. Being influenced by DJing is not really that constructive, because I don’t often play that much of my music out on the dancefloor, very rarely. I don’t like to see people stop dancing to it. [Laughter] But when you start to see what works on the dancefloor, it can change the way you make music. Take someone from the drum & bass scene, like Dillinja. Up until around ‘94, ‘95, Dillinja used to make quite experimental drum & bass. Then I think there was a point where he started DJing and started to realize what worked on the dancefloor, and it just changes your whole attitude, because you’re then starting to make music for the dancefloor and you lose this whole element of the mind. It should be three things: mind, body, and soul. Music should appeal to all of those at once. There’s music that’s just for dancing, there’s music that’s just for crying to, and there’s music that is just there to make you think and is political. But if you can try and incorporate all three of those into a record, then I think it makes it last forever, it makes it work on so many different levels. Nick Dwyer Different people have heard your music from five different names. The people who are booking you to DJ, do they want to book you as Domu or this or that? Domu As long as I know what their night is… I’d rather play an eclectic set. It is a horrible phrase: “Hi, I am an eclectic DJ.” But I just want to be able to play the records that I’m feeling at that time, and old records that I like that are relevant to that kind of movement. If it is a strictly house club, I would struggle playing house all night because I would get a bit bored, likewise drum & bass. I like to be able to move around a bit, play a bit of hip-hop halfway through to chill everyone out a bit, and then take it back up again. There a lot of different musics and BPMs: 100, 105, 110, 115, 118, 120 and up to the 130 BPM, like fast, 2-steppy, broken beat kind of stuff. It is all relevant at a different point in the night, and not just starting start slow and going faster and faster, because then by five in the morning you’d be playing gabber. [Laughter] You don’t want to do that. Just understanding what the crowd needs at different points. I have a lot of respect for people who just play records as well, they don’t bother about mixing, they don’t care about tempos. Just, here’s a good record, and play it from start to end, and then, here’s another good record. That skill is perhaps better than being technically good, because you are playing records that are just absolutely amazing. I would rather hear that than seamless mixing all night. Nick Dwyer You come from a background in turntablism, you’ve mastered it a little bit? Domu I’ve nowhere near mastered it. I used to watch the videos and go to the DMC things in the UK. I quite quickly realized I didn’t have the time to commit. I was interested in scratching from early hip-hop days but I couldn’t really scratch on my first decks because they were belt-drive. As soon as I got my Technics I was practising scratching, and trying to break my other hand in so I could go deck-to-deck and stuff, and I was really into it. But I realized it takes literally eight or nine hours of practice a day and I’d have to give up eating, a girlfriend... there just wasn’t time. Nick Dwyer Another thing that is kind of missing from the whole picture is a label. It seems that everyone that starts producing, after a while, they get their own label. Why haven’t you? You just can’t be bothered? Domu Kind of [laughs]. I just haven’t got time. I am not the most business-minded [person]. I have a very basic business attitude, which is if I can sense that you aren’t going to rip me off, I will be nice to you, until the point you rip me off, when I won’t work with you again. That’s it. I will treat people the way I expect them to treat me. And that’s it, that’s all my business attitude is. Nick Dwyer Any bad experiences so far? Domu No, it has all been great, but that is because I fell in with Reinforced and they are very down to earth. 4hero have been messed about in the past with record things that went wrong, and so they had a great deal of experience in that and they know what it is like to be young and eager. It was very lucky to fall in with them. But of course, it is very easy to be suckered, especially with complicated things like publishing and licensing and money. I don’t know if I really appeal to a major label. I am fairly unclassifiable as an artist because of all the different names and different styles. If anyone wants to sign me, it’s fine. Nick Dwyer You had said you were working on the new Domu album for Archive. What else is happening at the moment? Domu I’ve got the Bakura album burning at the back, and the Domu album nearly finished. The Nicola Kramer project — she sang on the Rima album and the Domu album. Actually, I will play a track from the Domu album. I’m actually quite proud of this because I wrote the words to this, and it’s a bit of sad, falling-out-of-love song. But I have done a whole album with her [Nicola Kramer] and it’s just taking a long time to finish because vocalists are hard to pin down sometimes. (music: Domu – “Last Time”) Nick Dwyer How long have you been working with her for? Domu I used to be in a band with her, in a kind of jazz-funk band. I was the DJ doing the cuts in the band. We did alright, we were called Collective Unconscious and we did the Jazz Cafe and stuff like that. We reached this thing where you’re 18 or 19 years old in a band, and then what do we do now? I didn’t have the production skills or knowledge to record them at that time, so it just disbanded. But I still work with them on different projects and I work with her. It’s a shame because, as a band, they would be perfect for me to take on the road live because I’ve known them for 10 or 12 years. Nick Dwyer So you haven’t done the Domu thing live? Domu No, because it is so studio-fiddly. It doesn’t really translate into live very well because it’s all about sample manipulation. With laptops and stuff you could probably do it now, but it would not be completely live. This whole semi-live thing, I really don’t know where I stand with it. [With the Rima project] the logistics of a band too are just unbearable to think about. With a band, you need to pay people for rehearsals, you need to have a group of dedicated musicians that are going to turn up for every practice. You have to practise for a week and then go on tour for a week or month, whatever. They need to be around. The situation just isn’t perfect to have that. I wish there were enough musicians around that I knew and that were of a standard to play my music that didn’t demand to be paid to come to practice. It’s just hard to make it happen. Nick Dwyer At this point I might stop asking questions and let you take over. What do we have here? [Gestures to table] Domu I just wanted to demonstrate the difference between using single hits and sounds — which is like house music or hip-hop programming — to using breaks. I’m not going to make a tune or anything, I just wanted to give a visual difference of what I think are the two major different ways to making a beat: a breakbeat or single hits. So I’ll do a bit of fiddling. I haven’t loaded up a break but I’ve got some single hits here. So with the drums that you find, certain drums sound right for certain things. [Demonstrates drum sounds] There’s certain places to find certain drums – funk drums are generally quite loose, gritty and dirty, and they’re not really good for being the main sound upfront, like a hip-hop tune or something like that. So it’s a bit cheeky but I tend to sample from records I like from whatever genre, where it’s a producer I trust, and I don’t think there’s anything wrong with it. I used to have this thing in drum & bass times about not sampling from drum & bass tunes to make drum & bass. I think if you’re going to make a hip-hop tune, you should sample from a house tune or a funk tune. I’d rarely sample from its own genre. That’s just a funny thing that I have. I also have this thing where I never play more than one track off a 12” in the same night, ‘cause I think that’s kind of cheating. Nick Dwyer Even if it’s a really strong B-side? DOMU Yeah. Dunno, just a funny thing I have. Anyway, these… [plays in drum sounds] The way I work is I play it in by hand. Anyone want to tell me where this kit’s from? It’s all off the same record. Any super nerds? [Plays 4/4 rhythm] That’ll be like a slow house, Theo Parrish thing. [Plays different rhythm] That’s a classic hip-hop beat. [Plays another rhythm] Or if you’re into Destiny’s Child from 1998. But that’s the kind of thing that can start a tune, whatever swing you decided to apply to it. Or even drum & bass [Plays drum & bass rhythm]. You can do whatever you want on any kind of kit and then add to it, elaborate. My point is that with any set of sounds you can just jam it out and make whatever rhythms you have in your head at the time. That’s the way I start my music. “I’ve been listening to a lot of this or that.” And the first rhythm that comes into my head I’ll put it down and that’ll be it. Hip-hop, house and drum & bass can all be made this way. Often you’re trying to make a [plays hip-hop beat]. But if you sped that up… [demonstrates] It works because these sounds are quite nice. I could do it with a set of sounds that are rubbish and it wouldn’t be inspiring. It’s all about the integrity of the sounds you choose. That’s kind of my point. If you can source a nice set of sounds that will inspire you, if you’ve got rhythms in you then the tune will happen. If you’ve got a load of duff sounds that are presets from a module, it wouldn’t inspire me. It might just be the way that some people work. Nick Dwyer Any questions at this point? Audience member Could you dive a bit into how you find the good sounds? When you find a funk sample, for instance, what exactly you do to cut it up and reuse it? Domu There are a couple of different ways, really. With a waveform, if you see the waveform, it will sound slightly different depending on how much space you have at the start of it and how much space you have at the end of it. So a sound like a hi-hat will sound completely different with loads of noise at the end of it or how tightly it is chopped. Likewise with the space at the start, when you press the key here [presses key], you can hear that is late. But if I program that, it will give it natural swing. If it was bang-on-the-dot, it would be tight. And when I quantize it, it will be super tight, and that will be a sound. But there is also another type of sound where all of the hits aren’t super tight, and that creates another sound. It creates a looser kind of sound, which is more organic. So it depends where you coming from musically. You can say, “I want all the sounds to be tight on this track,” or you can say, “It’s going to be loose.” For soul-y, loose hip-hop, this kit would be good because all the sounds are a bit late. And if you programmed it and didn’t quantize it, it would sound fairly loose. But if I cut all the samples and make all the start points [perfectly tight], it would sound a bit less vibey. Audience member You are sleeping in the middle of the night and the broken beat god kidnaps you and leaves you on this island and he says you can use three instruments, hardware, or software synths – what are the three things you’d have to have? You’ve got a computer, you’ve got Logic already, and all your recording equipment. Domu My E-mu. Not the animal, that would be ridiculous, unless I got hungry but I don’t eat meat. [Laughter] My E-mu sampler and a keyboard. I would definitely have some type of outboard because it’s nice to have the tweakability of the keyboard. It is all very well having a plethora of plugin synths, and you do have some hands-on features with plugins, you can interface with them very well, but there is a certain sound that comes from analog keyboards that you can’t recreate. So I would have something fairly versatile like a [Roland] Juno, something with bass, pads, lead, and a little tweakage. A nice warm thing like a [Juno] 60 or even a 106 would be alright. I always have a shaker with me, because a little egg shaker doesn’t take up any space but a little bit of live shaking on a record can give it so much vibe. It can, you know? If you have a programmed beat, you don’t even need a pop shield or even a decent mic, and you just shaker into it, straight into audio for a few bars. EQ it up and compress it or whatever, and it’ll sound lovely and it’ll sound live. And if you have extra programming on the top, it’ll have feel, because it’s come from you. Audience member We’ve actually been using a shaker made of an old floss container and some sugar. Domu Yeah, sugar, beans, rice, we can even record our own bodies. Anything is a possible source of sound. I’m not Herbert – that’s great, that is his thing. But [what he shows] is that you need to be resourceful, you don’t need that much equipment. It’s more about the ideas you have and the choice of sounds. I think that is my point, that if you choose the right four or five sounds, mix it well, you can have a great record. It is more about the process of putting something good in rather than putting average sounds in and working on it for ten years and getting something good out. Nick Dwyer Are you going to be around in the practice studio today? Domu Yep. Nick Dwyer So if anyone feels like asking him anything they’re welcome. Dominic, thank you very much. [Applause]

---

Title: Amp Fiddler
Date: 2015-04-22
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/amp-fiddler-turn-up-the-amp/

Amp Fiddler
As he tells us in this lecture from the 2003 Red Bull Music Academy, for Joseph “Amp” Fiddler it’s been a lifelong journey of musical discoveries. After starting out in the group Enchantment, circa 1982, he became more enchanted with the music of Parliament-Funkadelic. Thanks to his hard work and determination, it was only two years before George Clinton took him on as a band member. Having achieved this goal, he surveyed the tones and textures of electronic dance by working with artists as diverse as Maxwell, Jay Dee, Prince, and Moodymann. These collaborations came out of a simple desire to see cats fulfill their dreams, and in turn gave him the knowledge he needed to fast forward into the future of house music.
Hosted by Amp Fiddler Greetings, folks. Glad to be here at the Red Bull [Music Academy], such a lovely place. Thank you. Brendan M Gillen Why don’t you give us a brief introduction of where you’re at right now and what you’ve been doing with records, the music you’ve been releasing. Amp Fiddler I started some years ago, creating music ago in a lot of different ways. Through electronic music I’ve always bought drum machines and keyboards. I started playing piano as a kid, but electronics always arose my curiosity. So through the years I continued to do that same thing. I’m going to move quickly through where I started to where I am now. We always made demos and created songs through drum machines, like when I saw you guys working with that Roland 909 yesterday. We bought whatever we could get to try to create music. And throughout the past five years, after years of touring, I started to create some music myself, started sending music to a label in Europe. The conversation came up about the possibility of creating dance music, and I thought, “OK, I could do that.” I considered myself an artist first. Because being from Motown [Detroit], I’ve always been impressed by the history. I’m a Motown singer in a sense, but I also create. This label deal gave me the opportunity to do something that I wasn’t doing before, which was electronic music in the sense of dance music, as opposed to me doing soul or hip-hop. Most of my friends, they didn’t really like dance music. They see it as some kind of “gay house music” for whatever reason. They are sitting in a one-dimensional matrix in a sense. They don’t see the world, they just see the neighborhood and what they hear and what they know. So I had to kind of kick them out of my past thinking to get involved in new music in the way that I have now. I’m still searching and learning. I want to do more with electronic music and with what I do as a singer. So I’ve been collaborating with as many people as I can who make different kind of electronic music. I’m always listening to whatever I can. I’m not a young kid just starting doing this. Most people who I’ve grown up with are stuck in what they do, they want to hear some smooth jazz and really cool music. Anything outside of that is kind of weird for them. I’m going past that. Brendan M Gillen Let’s talk a little bit about the traditional side. What I mean by traditional side is Parliament-Funkadelic. In Detroit, that’s like indigenous music. Amp Fiddler When I first heard that, I was excited, because I’d been involved in doo-wop and I didn’t like that before, because before that, I was listening to Janis Joplin and Hendrix, The Beatles, rock & roll, Motown. So Parliament-Funkadelic stuck in the back of my mind. I had just started to play a little keyboards. I think we have to keep our vision as far as who and where we want to be in our future, we have to stand in the now and see ourselves in the future as far as who we want to be in our lives. We have to say it to become it. And beyond that, you’ve got to say: “I am that and it’s gonna happen.” Whatever you say is what is. At that time, I said, “One day, I will play in that band.” I started meeting people who were involved. I was always making demo tapes. I have a whole box of just demo tapes. From 4-track to 8-track and then to 16. When George Clinton heard that demo tape, he called me to the studio and asked me if I wanted to get involved. Started going to the studio and started touring. That’s how that came about. Brendan M Gillen What era were you involved with Parliament? Amp Fiddler That was 1984. They had just come off of being huge. So they were taking a break and doing more recording in the studio. I was learning a lot about how to record sounds and tones and how they work together. What amazed me even more was how vocalists work in the studio. I couldn’t imagine how people could remember all those notes and sing them together and keep doubling and tripling. Brendan M Gillen Is not George Clinton the master of these multi-part vocals? Amp Fiddler Most definitely, and not only that, I think that something to learn from it was that he would constantly double, triple or quadruple different parts when making a track. The way he stacked the vocals really made the production stronger. When working with vocalists, you have to have a great concept of making them sound good. Sometimes I’m guilty of that in a bad sense. When I played with a DJ upstate, he said, “Well, your tracks are nice, but your vocals are on the forefront of the kick [drum], whereas on most house tracks you hear the kick right upfront.” I’m not a DJ, so maybe I missed that in some ways, it’s something for me to learn. And that’s why I have a different respect for DJs in that sense. A lot of musicians are either intimidated [by DJs] or they just don’t like y’all. Because here you are playing their music and they’ve been studying all this time and they don’t get a chance to have the kind of dance medium that you have. But maybe they’re missing that. You also are the people who we need to interact [with] to create the kind of medium that we need to get our records played, and to know how to create the right tonalities to make people dance. Brendan M Gillen In general [in electronic music] it was considered a bad thing to be musical, let alone to bring in a bass guitar, a guitar, a piano, any of these types of instruments. This was almost a sin. Or to know how chords are supposed to interrelate. But the knowledge of those things, look how much richer that makes a Galaxy 2 Galaxy record, or the way that Mike Banks can interrelate chords, I think it adds to it. But coming from a medium where people are borrowing from a very musical history – when you look at disco, when you look at where jazz and funk meet, this is a very musical thing. Before it was a sin, and now it’s like, “Wait a minute, electronic music has a history that starts before drum machines.” It’s really easy to trace it back. I don’t know anybody who could listen to a record by
Fela Kuti and not see a direct connotation straight into house music. It’s this endless groove. You hear the same thing in a Basic Channel record, you hear the same thing in a Theo Parrish record, a never-ending groove. It has a much longer history. Amp Fiddler I totally agree. I heard that same thing as a kid. My dad was from St. Thomas, and when I heard calypso music, I heard [imitating] “Oomp-oomp-oomp-oomp…” It’s the same beat, the same trance I was hearing as a kid. It’s always been there. It’s a beautiful thing. Now it’s time for that change where people can cross over and mix up things. Brendan M Gillen Hey, let’s play them a song. What song shall we choose? Amp Fiddler Do you have “Love And War”? Because right now, with what’s going on from where we’re from, it’s important to keep that conversation apparent. (music: Amp Fiddler - “Love And War”) Brendan M Gillen Let’s talk about playing with George Clinton and crew on the road – how big was the band? Amp Fiddler Probably 18 people. It was kind of scary at first because I had no idea what to play. I was a young musician and they said, “Come to Europe. Here’s a tape of 30 songs that we play. Learn these songs, we’ll rehearse at soundcheck and have a show.” So I had to learn those songs, come to soundcheck and play. It was bad enough not knowing the songs that well and not being able to rehearse, but what was worse than that was the fact that I didn’t know the musicians that well and they didn’t trust me. It’s hard, when it’s that many people, you have to know when to stop and when to play, what tones work in the music that can be heard, what tones don’t work that are too much. Like, you know how strings are, if you have strings in a song that are way up here [raises hands in the air] it’s like, “stop!” All those things were prevalent to make me understand how to play with those musicians. It’s like if you were DJing with a band and you just had to be creative enough to pull samples within that band to make it interesting. Some records just won’t work. Brendan M Gillen It’s kind of hard to explain if you’ve never experienced it, but when you play live on stage, things that never happen in your brain will happen. It’s much different than a group of people practising together in a room. It’s gonna be different when there’s an audience there, there’s going to be so much more in your head, you have to go to a different part of yourself. But it’s like, how to fit these sounds… I can see what you’re saying. You could play a tone that’s been covered by the other musicians. I’m sure that a number of these guys had been playing for ten years or more with this group. Were there people in the group who had played with James Brown? Amp Fiddler Yes, there was Maceo Parker, the saxophonist. He was main person who had played with James Brown and he was the band leader, the one to yell at you, to tell you either to stop playing or… Brendan M Gillen How did he communicate that on stage? Did he have a special kind of nod or something? Amp Fiddler He was the MD, the musical director, at the time. Once you fucked up, he would look at you with this real ugly face. So you would stop playing or play something different. Brendan M Gillen I always heard that James Brown was the world’s most evil musical director of all time [both laugh]. Amp Fiddler I heard that same thing. Brendan M Gillen So that’s like a birth by fire. Amp Fiddler Yeah, it was. It brought me a long way and I learned a lot from it. I always thought it would be an education, a schooling, but I learned how to arrange a band, and how to make things work within a band in terms of business, as far as tour management, moving around on a bus, marketing. Brendan M Gillen After Parliament, what other musical stuff did you do? Amp Fiddler I did a Seal album, I did a Maxwell album. The thing that I was always keen on as an artist was to leave my ego at home. I left the ego at home. So whenever I was out on the street, as [it was with] Maxwell, I was walking on the street and these kids said, “Yo man, we saw you at the Parliament show last night, are you Amp Fiddler?” I said, “Yeah.” They said, “Damn, you probably don’t wanna do it, but we’d like you to play on our demo from this artist.” So I said, “Give me your number, call me tomorrow at this hotel and I may come over if I have time.” They called me, I came over, I played on the Maxwell demo. There was no money, I just did it ‘cos they seemed like cool guys, I didn’t really care. I went home, the next year he called me back and said he wanted me to play on his album. I think that humility, having that sense of just being there for people and giving, is what got me more into getting more. I was giving a lot. Brendan M Gillen That’s a thing that a lot of people don’t know – is that you have to give to get. Audience member Kenny Dixon Jr., or Moodymann, is a mythical figure in Detroit. How did your association come about with him? I feel house has been a pretty boring genre the last couple of years, but the stuff you guys have done is pretty interesting. How did that come about? Amp Fiddler That’s interesting, because he’s one of those persons that I was doing sessions for and my record company kept saying [affecting English accent] “Do you know this bloke Moodymann?” And I kept saying, “No, I don’t know him, but I’ve been doing sessions with some cool cats that make house music lately.” A week later, [Kenny] gave me his record and I said, “Oh, shit. This is Moodymann.” [Laughter] I’ve been working with him all this time and didn’t know it. That’s how our relationship started. Brendan M Gillen Just think about that story, that’s how low-key that gentleman is. [Amp Fiddler] was working with him, and he had to get his record to know that he was Moodymann. Amp Fiddler Exactly, I just work and I do things. And I think a lot of us in Detroit do things for each other in a way. We give a lot to each other without a lot of expectations and there’s not a lot of ego involved. Because we can all have that from our experiences and our positive things that have happened to us in our careers can create that “I’m the shit” thing. We don’t have that. Some of us do but the majority of us, who I’m involved with, do not have that and it enables us to give to each other. Like actually, I’m helping [Academy participant] Monica with a project and we borrowed her in a sense, she’s helping me with my website and I help her produce. The same thing with Carl Craig and with other producers like
Kevin Saunderson and Eddie Fowlkes. It’s a basic set-up with keyboards and drum machines. A lot of times there’s a track already done and they need something to fill up that space to create the mood they want to create. It wasn’t easy for me at first because I had to go back and listen to so many different genres of music on the dancefloor to understand what was may be needed as far as the colour. Because I could add something that could be totally too dark, or I could add something totally too bright, as far as tonality in a record. And it’s important that I had to learn different things rhythmically. Some things need chords that lay down, some things need chords that are rhythmic, some songs need basslines. I had to learn to think less about playing and think more about adding to the track something that it needed, as opposed to something that I wanted to play because it felt good and I’m a musician and I like to play. So it made me think economical in the way that I had to go back and listen to all of this music. A lot of music that I’m listening to is tracks that people like you probably make, that are not proficient, or who are proficient. A lot of things that are done in a simple way that are just so sweet that work together when it’s all put together in a puzzle. Brendan M Gillen Talk about working with Slum Village a little bit more, I love them. Amp Fiddler Jay Dee was the kid that created all those tracks. He came in and played them for me and he had created them with cassette players. He just kept dubbing from one cassette to another until he got the track done. And I said, “Damn, if you can do that, then I can show you how to use an MPC, take those same samples and make a track.” So I watched him as I showed him how to use the machine. After hearing the same tracks, he took the same pieces that he had put together and put them into the MPC and collaged them into the same tracks. Just to see the look on his face was so amazing. He was just so excited by hearing them in the way he always wanted to hear them. It was exciting to hear that. I had an 8-track tape player at the time, so we after put the music to the tape they did all the vocals. It was just sweet to see the cats fulfil their dreams as far as having their demo done, because they had the tracks, but they didn’t have the facility to put the vocals on, to see what they were gonna sound like. The big part of making records is to have that ability to have the freedom to create different vocal nuances and see what your vocal sounds like [makes cartoonish vocal sounds]. You can just create the character that you want. Brendan M Gillen It goes to show how in Detroit, you know, he’s talking about Jay Dee making beats with two cassette machines… I know many people from Detroit who learned to mix with just one turntable you couldn’t change the pitch on and one cassette player you could change the pitch on. It’s a town full of people who won’t take no for an answer. You can make music in any way possible. Amp Fiddler Yeah, he took cassette players and learned how to make beat tapes. He’s got the title track on my album. The interesting part of this song is that I introduced him to Q-Tip
and made the introduction so that Slum Village could get on and that he could get his production available. After that he got successful and produced so many records. Brendan M Gillen Which track is it? Amp Fiddler “Waltz Of A Ghetto Fly,” the title track of my album. (music: Amp Fiddler - “Waltz Of A Ghetto Fly”)

---

Title: Chris Palmer
Date: 2015-04-22
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/chris-palmer-new-ears-resolution/

Chris Palmer
Chris Palmer of Layered Studio in Johannesburg is often name-checked as the best mastering engineer for dance music in South Africa. He’s also cut a bold swathe across hip hop and classical jazz recording, not to mention SA’s home-grown genre of kwaito, which depends on kicking percussion and a boompty-boomp bass. In his session at the 2003 Red Bull Music Academy in Cape Town, he shared insights into the mysteries of mastering. It’s not always about what your ears can audibly perceive: “The more you trust your feelings, the better the track will sound at the end of the day.”
Hosted by Tony Nwachukwu Hi Chris, what do you do? Chris Palmer Four things. First and foremost, I’m a mastering engineer, which means basically spending all day and most nights in the studio so I have a healthy studio tan. Secondly, I’m a producer. Thirdly, I’m a DJ and fourthly I edit a magazine, Music Maker Magazine, which I pass around so you guys can have a look. Basically, I’ve been working in the industry for about 13 years. Tony Nwachukwu OK, 13 – not 30, yeah? Chris Palmer No, not that old. I started out in live sounds, working on rigging and stuff with a lot of bands that were coming out there, Crowded House, Depeche Mode and OMD. Tony Nwachukwu So you do the front of house mixing? Chris Palmer Helping with rigging and stuff, learning basically but then after working... Tony Nwachukwu Did you have the obligatory cheap black T-shirt and black trousers? Chris Palmer Yeah, but after working 56 hours non-stop on the beach one day, I decided loud sound wasn’t for me anymore. Then I got into studio [work], started editing. I luckily missed out the tape editing stage, thank god! Any of you ever edited on tape? It’s a complete joke. You don’t ever want to do it, trust me. You gotta make working copies of what you done, then you start editing and if you make a mistake you got to go to the next copy and cut from there. It’s quite a mission. And then afterwards, you got to run the whole lot down to another tape and that adds a lot of noise as well, some of it good noise, not all of it. [smiles ironically] Tony Nwachukwu When you first started, what kind of system were you using? Chris Palmer When I first started editing, it was a small Mac with the very first Sound Tools, which was a baby brother of ProTools. That was before ProTools came out. It was just a basic 16-bit, two channel editing program with not much else on it besides some rudimentary EQs and a couple of crappy compressors. So a lot of processing was done in analog domain as well, which still is the best way to do it, EQ-wise. Tony Nwachukwu Do you think so? Chris Palmer Yes, absolutely. Just EQ-wise, I mean, in terms of all the other processing it’s much better digitally. But for EQ-ing [analog] is still definitely better. I brought a few examples of tracks that are unmastered and the same tracks mastered to give you a better idea of the differences. After the session we’ll do a practical, where I actually take the track that you guys have done and master it to give you a better idea of exactly what goes on. I’ve got a Finalizer here, which is a unit that’s designed for mastering. It’s got a whole mastering chain inside. I go through it with you and show you exactly what it's about. You can do everything that’s on here on software and most people do, but I thought I bring it along just to show you guys because it’s an easy way to demo what mastering is. How many of you guys have actually put out records before? [looks around the participants] So you've kind of been through the process. Any of the other guys been through the mastering process? Basically, what it entails is two things. Firstly, EQ. Balancing your tracks so that throughout the frequency spectrum – audible and inaudible – you get a balanced sound. That’s the first part of it. It’s all relative, so every time you change one thing, the whole mix changes. So it’s like a continuous refining until you get the right sound. Second to that is the dynamics part of it. As you may know, if it’s louder, it’s better as most people see it in the world. Not always true, but usually if it sounds louder, it’s better. The dynamic part of it perceives dynamics, as well as the actual dynamic range. We’ll go through it with the Finalizer. It’s a nice way to demonstrate it on the demos I’ve got here as well. Basically, what you’re trying to do as a mastering engineer is to get it as hot as possible, get it as balanced as possible onto digital format, or, if you're doing records onto analog format without perceivably changing the mix. I mean, if you guys are going to spend like three weeks mixing a track, I don’t wanna go and change your sound in the two or three hours that I master it. I gotta try and get it where I want it, without changing the sound at all – perceivably. Trick your ears into believing that it sounds exactly the same. That’s basically the idea. Let me play you guys a few tracks and give you some sort of references of where I’m coming from. I play you an unmastered version first and then we’re going to the mastered version just to give you the background. (music: unmastered house track) The bass is quite floppy in the bottom end and there are a lot of frequencies in there that aren’t really doing the mix much good. I’m gonna give you the mastered version now and we’ll see what you think. (music: mastered version of the same track) The clarity becomes a lot better and it becomes a lot louder, a lot tighter, too, did you hear that? Tony Nwachukwu Let me ask a question. The premastered version, the person who mixed that obviously thinks that’s a mix, right? Chris Palmer Yeah. Tony Nwachukwu Doesn’t it create a kind of feeling of insecurity? You know, you mastered, you mix a track thinking it is to the best of your ability... Chris Palmer No, because there are about three engineers in the whole world that don’t get EQed when they go for masterings. Everyone gets EQed. The mastering engineer EQs everything, trust me. What [the particpants] Marianne and David were touching on yesterday, if you guys were in the studio, about keeping the dynamics fairly open when you're mixing, is quite true. The more dynamic the actual mix is, the more I can do with it once I’m mastering it. The harder I can push it. If it’s too compressed, it’s harder for me to do my job. So just remember that when you guys lay down the mix. Lay it down compressed as you want it, lay it down dynamic and even lay it down on different formats; DAT or CDs and go through which sounds better to you and use that one. OK, I’m gonna play a few more [examples]. (music: unmastered house track) Basically, what I want is, I don’t want the mix to change much. You can hear the mix is still fairly similar. I mean, there is a lot of things that have actually changed, but perceivably it’s still fairly similar to what you heard before. The less you can hear the difference, the better for me actually. As long as it’s louder and it’s kicking. [laughs] Participant For both of those tracks, was it a multi-band and EQ combination? Chris Palmer Yes, I used a mixture of a multi-band limiter... Tony Nwachukwu What does that mean? Chris Palmer I don’t know if any of you guys have worked with a channel splitter live, where you split the bass, mids and highs into separate signals, so that you can feed different amps to play your sound through. Basically, that’s how it was done originally in mastering. They would split up the lows, mids and highs and then compress them separately because you can set different attacks on the highs because they are a lot quicker and set a lower attack on the bottom, because it’s a lot slower. Basically that creates a much tighter mix and a lot louder mix as well. Also [it will] allow you to EQ all three of them separately as well. On the Finalizer it’s got three band compressors and limiters already here. So it splits up for you automatically then you can adjust them. I’ll show you guys that when we do the practical a bit later. Tony Nwachukwu Would you say that mastering is music genre-specific? For example, I wouldn’t imagine that you would master a rock record the same way you would master a reggae record. Chris Palmer No, also the audiences are looking for different things as well. Like, an R&B record, the guys are looking for a hell of a bass response. You’ve got a much wider bass range that you use in R&B than you would use in house or rock. Rock is quite thin actually when you master it. So yes, it is definitely genre-specific and in terms of dance music even there are specific things. Like, certain breakbeat styles would be like a lot more bass heavy than... Tony Nwachukwu For example, drum & bass? Chris Palmer Yeah, drum & bass and even the Prodigy stuff and breakbeat stuff. Whereas some house producers would try to pull back a little on the bottom end just to get more punch. Yeah, this is very genre-specific, absolutely. Tony Nwachukwu What has been your worst mastering experience? Chris Palmer There’s too many to mention. In this country we have 11 official languages and a lot of the mastering that I have done in the past would get sent to me on an unmarked tape with nothing basically and a track-listing from the record company. And you have to put the two together. Trying to work out which song is which through trying to pick up some of the lyrics. And if that is not working out, try going to find someone that actually speaks the language to come and help me out. Also, just some of the actual mixes that I have got in the past have been horrific. I mean, like 50Hz hum coming through the whole mix, noise like shhhshshshshsh. [whistles loud] Tony Nwachukwu That’s character, don’t you think? Chris Palmer No, not that, I mean noise like characteristic noise. Dr. Moog agrees with this, characteristic electronic noise is great. I mean, it adds flavor to the song, but just general tape hiss is not cool at all. Bad wiring contributes to this as well. Do you guys know the difference between a balanced signal and an unbalanced signal? In your cabling you have a shield, which covers the wire where the signal goes through, the hot signal. In a two core cable the shield is used for signal as well, so your negative or your ground runs down the shield. So any noise, any sort of lighting cables or electrical noise gets picked up into the cable and transferred into your sound. So basically, it picks up noise from everywhere. Now, what happens with a balanced cable, a three core? It’s got a shield and the other two cables as well. So the ground takes away all the noise and protects your signal. So anytime you’ve got the opportunity to use a balanced signal, rather use the balanced than the unbalanced. It’s much cleaner and it’s much hotter as well. You can play much louder on a balanced signal. Just a bit of trivia information. Tony Nwachukwu Do you have some more music here? Chris Palmer Yeah, I got couple more here that I can play. (music: unmastered track, then the mastered version) Tony Nwachukwu Blank CDs, the difference between a branded one and [if it] is unbranded is this process, essentially? Chris Palmer No, not necessarily. I mean, you get some unbranded [CDs] that are pretty good as well. I mean, I use a specific branded CD, because at the CD pressing plant where most of our stuff gets pressed, they have had less trouble with this brand than any other brand, so I use this specific brand just because of that. But I don’t think it’s gonna make a difference too much. I mean, there are certain sorts of Taiwanese and various other sort of cheap copies that are really bad and you shouldn’t use them for mastering. But it’s got to such a stage now where most CD-Rs are useable. But when the actual laser is writing, burning onto the CD, you gonna get errors getting transferred somewhere along the line. Tony Nwachukwu Getting a bit back on personal production and stuff. I make music at home and also I make demos at home and also I produce records and master at home, not in a studio necessarily. What things should I think about when I’m actually producing records or mixing records? Chris Palmer I got the best advice from an engineer called Jay, he mixed Prince’s Black Album and he came out to mix Miriam Makeba’s album at our studio. I used to work at a very high profile studio, we did the Lion King II soundtrack there, the Lion King III soundtrack and other stuff with Disney. It’s a very high profile studio in Johannesburg, probably the highest profile studio in Johannesburg, it’s called CSR. They basically got a 144-input Euphonix mixing console, they have got two other studios with high end digital mixing capabilities. They are running the ProTools high density 192kHz sampling system. Tony Nwachukwu Back to the guy who mixed the Black Album. Chris Palmer Yeah, the advice that he gave, and this is probably the best that I have heard, is, “Put the mixdown to a soft [volume] level where you can just hear – quite soft, but not too soft that you can’t hear. If you can hear everything balanced when you listen to it that way and you can hear everything cleanly and balanced, your mix is right.” Basically it’s the same for mastering. The more dynamic range you got, the more the mastering engineer can do with it. I can do a hell of a lot more work on something that is like fairly open and got a lot of dynamics. Tony Nwachukwu So should I, as a producer, allow you space? What I mean by that is, when I do a mix I might use a Finalizer, I might use a multi-band compressor on the group inserts. Should I then not do that? Chris Palmer I would rather not, like Marianne Davis was saying last night, rather not. Individual things like your kick drum and bass I would say, “Yes, go ahead!” But not over the final mix. It’s also not a good idea to master your own stuff. What I generally say to you guys is if you’ve got friends who are doing the same stuff as you, and you both sort of master your own stuff, then give him your track to master and you master his track. Because you lose objectivity after working on a track for so long. I’ve got an assistant that works with me, and then, if I mixed down a track that I have written, he will often do most of the mastering with me because he has got a more objective ear in terms of like I’ve listened to it five million times and I don’t know where I am anymore. It’s a bit of good advice. Tony Nwachukwu And is it an idea to do different passes of mixes as well? Chris Palmer Yeah. There still is a school, especially in the States, where you do a different mix for every different format: TV, Video, CD, even adverts have a different way that they’re mixed. If you’re doing a vocal track always lay down your vocal mix and an instrumental, so that you don’t ever have to go back when you have to do a remix. Tony Nwachukwu And an a capella? Chris Palmer Yeah, as many different mixes as you want and you can take them to the mastering engineer and he will choose the best one. Tony Nwachukwu But he will charge you as well? Chris Palmer Yeah, but I mean, you can find a reasonable mastering guy, it’s not too expensive, I’m sure. Or, like I was saying, if you got a friend doing the same thing, give him your tracks and he goes through yours and you go through his. That’s a much better way, I think. Tony Nwachukwu Do you see a day where your job becomes irrelevant? Chris Palmer I don’t think so. There will always be a need for the human element in transferring to any format, which is basically what I am doing. I am sort of facilitating the transfer from one format into another and I always think there is a need for that.

---

Title: Claudio Coccoluto
Date: 2015-04-22
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/claudio-coccoluto-come-si-dice-house-music/

Claudio Coccoluto
From being the first European DJ to play at the Sound Factory in New York City to influencing people like Patrick Pulsinger, Claudio Coccoluto has been around the block more than a few times. At the 2004 Red Bull Music Academy, the man behind the Belo Horizonti duo recounted stories of aural sensations, the duties of a DJ as a guardian of music and mixing from memory and fantasy.
Hosted by Emma Warren Here is Claudio. Kind of the first thing I want to ask you really, is that Italy seems to be constantly a house nation. It seems to love a particular kind of house music. Why is that? And is that really the case? Claudio Coccoluto There are a lot of different reasons. The main reasons are: Italy was of course not the land where it was born. It was like a colony of Anglo-Saxon, London and New York. When I was young in my life, I looked at London and New York as the places where things are going on. That holds true until the ’90s. It is known that house music was born in the USA. Now, the scene is completely different. House music belongs to the world and the scene has completely changed. I think that house was not a musical genre, but a musical attitude. It’s a mood that you can use to be a DJ or a person that uses sounds different from rock, from electronic, from everything. In a mood that is house. House is just the way. But house music as a culture knows no nation, no sex, no race, no class. This is the main character for me. I think, in Italy it has been so popular and appreciated because in Italy the club scene is very important in a social context. It is not simply a place, where you dance, it is a weekly appointment for everybody. Go to the club, meet every other person, listen to music, dance – living the music. This is the only possibility to do so for young Italians. Emma Warren Clubs physically have developed in Italy. You have so many clubs, which are basically events in themselves. Very big clubs, very ornate with a whole load of architecture and stuff going on. How did that happen? Claudio Coccoluto It’s very difficult to explain. See, we started to copy. Like every other country in the world, we started to copy the scene and the clubs in London. Until a few years ago, the Ministry of Sound was very popular. I have seen people with my own eyes that had the Ministry of Sound logo tattooed on their upper arm. Emma Warren Those were Italians? Claudio Coccoluto Yeah. I think that’s because of the great power of the English press and what they do in marketing for their product. We were a victim in a way. At the beginning, everything from London was perfect, was brilliant, was the best. Now, it has completely changed because the relation is on the same level now. In Italy, we think that you need a sensibility of professionalism in order to make a club. A good club does not only make money and nothing else. It makes culture and some money, and this is the balance. It’s not a good club if there is only the market view. We try to do this in Rome with our club Goa. We do a program and a marketing plan that is OK, but we are true to our soul and our vision of the musical context. It’s like a mission. We need to explain to our customers and the people that follow us that a club is a place where a culture is involved and not where you just pay for the ticket and nothing else. Emma Warren You said to me a minute ago that your kind of philosophy is not about being a superstar DJ, it’s about the music. How do you do that with Goa? How does that come across with the kind of DJs you book or the kind of music you play at the club? Claudio Coccoluto This is another problematic question. Because, I speak about my person and I never asked in my life to be a superstar DJ. Everything that has happened, happened out of myself without my intention. I just do my job. Playing records and playing music – nothing else. If somebody comes and says, “You’re the best! We need to do a cover story, you need to go to Ibiza.” That is not the goal of my life. The goal of my life is to do it better every time that I play. Better than the night before. Emma Warren So this season at Goa, presumably, you were playing there very regularly what kind of music or records were very big for you? Claudio Coccoluto I don’t think in that category or of a particular kind of music. I try to feel the music in my life. Since I was a child, I don’t say, “What is pop? What is rock? What is folk?” I try to make the decision out of my guts. It’s very easy to be conditioned by the media or the scene or marketing [laughs] and I don’t want that to happen. I play what I feel to be good. Emma Warren And specifically, what kind of things have you been playing? Claudio Coccoluto Specifically, I think, I played modern electronic dance music with a lot of references to the past or to the future. But, it’s not so important because I think that house music is a spherical thing. You see a lot of different sides to it, but still the same sphere. I think that house music is a box, where you can put inside everything. From electro to techno to soul to disco. I love to mix all those elements and to say that in this record from Berlin or New York, I heard something sensational. It’s not a sound element or a particular kind of music or a particular structure. Emma Warren I noticed on your chart on your website that you had !!!, Alter Ego, the Orb and Hakan Lidbo were the top four tunes. Is that representative? Say, we going to come and see you at Goa tonight, is that what we will be hearing you play? Claudio Coccoluto Yeah. At the moment, that is the music that gives me the most emotions. When I listened to !!!, it’s something that has a link to something from 20 years ago. Music like this form the USA is very interesting because it correlates funk, disco and electronic in just one thing. It’s very similar to me. I need to explain that I’m not so happy that people recognize me as a house DJ. House is a very small term for the masses. House is a very small concept. [laughs] Thank you. !!! gave me the occasion to play something from the past that is very difficult to play in a straight electronic set. There are a lot of things that give me the occasion to do a diversion in my set and go around. Emma Warren I wanted to ask you about the American connection, but before that, talking about !!! in your position as kind of the biggest DJ in Italy, do you find it to be difficult to play the things that you want? Are you limited in any way by the fact that so many people want to come and see you? Claudio Coccoluto No. I think and I hope to be not influenced by my position. I try to use my position and do something special and something different. Because I think, it’s a duty for a DJ that has, sorry, a “name” to do something different and special. If you try to get applauded with simple records, the challenge is lost. The challenge for the DJ is, in my opinion, to get the crowd dancing to stuff they would have thought as impossible to dance to. Audience Member Let’s talk a little bit about the late ‘80s when Italy was a place where electronic music was widely appreciated and became a major production center in electronic music. Could you please tell us something about those times and how Italians actually started producing good electronic music massively and you heard Black Box and all that stuff? Claudio Coccoluto Everything is right, but not so, so right. Because, Italy in the ’80s was an adventure-land. There were many people doing electronic music with a pioneer attitude, OK? Emma Warren Who were these pioneers? Claudio Coccoluto For sure, people like Black Box, but also Kano, by Santiago… Audience Member Do you have something by them with you? Claudio Coccoluto Let me see. [looks through his record bag] No, nothing. You spoke about this with Metro Area, right? In the ’80s everybody who like me, used an 808 and the first sampler, was in a condition that, if he spoke to a musician, a serious musician, they don’t trusted any of us. This went on for maybe 10 years, 15 years. And Black Box and everything that you know so well because of their world-wide fame, was just a single experience and not representative for a scene. There was no scene! There were persons, OK, but Black Box as a person, 49ers as a person, but without any relation. Because I remember that everything that you just named was by two or three little labels without the power of marketing, just with the power of ideas and nothing else. That is not so different at the moment. There are no majors that support the sound of little producers or small labels. There is no structure. Emma Warren This brings us to something I was going to ask you. There was a quote from you in an interview where you said that the music was born as something avant-garde, not as something for business. Obviously, as we see and talk about, there was this sense of experimentation. Which kind of people are still doing that now in Italy? Claudio Coccoluto I think everything in Italy started from the ’70s, not in the ’80s. There was a club near Riccione named Baia Degli Angeli. There was Moz-Art and DJ Baldelli that started to play in a different way that was never heard before. This guys mixed with a great liberty everything from funk – James Brown, I don’t know – to Kraftwerk to everything that was new or different in the club. In Italy that is called “Afro.” Why, nobody knows… [laughs] No, “Afro” because there are a lot of percussion moments in the set, but that is not a reference to the music. It’s a nickname. But those are my roots. Today, I am a DJ because of Moz-Art and DJ Baldelli in ‘78 from Baia Degli Angeli. Emma Warren Did you go to the club? Claudio Coccoluto No, never. I received the tapes and I listened to them again and again for a long time in order to understand what was happening in those sets. What is mixing? We speak about ‘78. Probably the first ones to use the mixer in a creative way. I have to explain. This is Chicken Lips, DJ-Kicks. I think that you know this. And with a big surprise to myself, I found everything inside from the Afro and DJ Baldelli and Moz-Art from ‘78. Because stuff like Nina Hagen... (music: Nina Hagen – “African Reggae” / applause) I asked myself, why the Chicken Lips chose this stuff for their album? What’s the link? And I found the answer. We had a DJ in Roma named Leo Young, who is very fond indeed of Afro and lives in London. I spoke to him about five years ago. He met guys like the the Chicken Lips, like the Idjut Boys, like DJ Harvey – people like that. And Leo taught them about this guys and what happened in Italy in ’78. And the Chicken Lips were like, “Wow, in Italy in ’78 happened this? This is it!” And then he showed them the tape of Baia Degli Angeli from ’78 or ’77 or ’79. I put an end to the story. The sound of the Chicken Lips is a perfect fusion of my roots and my future. The sound I actually love to play. This is the mission of DJing, I think. Producing music for the sake of music. We are not musicians, we don’t have an academic background to do something special. But we can bring together some elements from the past, from the future, from electronic things, from breaking glass, from I don’t know what into something else and something different because this is our goal in this business. I think it is so. We need to give pleasure to the people that are dancing on the dancefloor because this is the first reason, to be in this work. And I think the perfect mixing comes from mixing from memories and the fantasy. This is the real thing to do. Emma Warren So, the perfect mix evokes memory and fantasy? Claudio Coccoluto Exactly. Emma Warren I think this whole thing of Leo Young introducing Chicken Lips to this sound is quite interesting. Is that something you ever did with Basement Jaxx? Claudio Coccoluto Yes. I have a relationship with Basement Jaxx from the first time we met in the international scene. I met them - I don’t remember exactly – probably at a party in one of the worst clubs in London. At that time, they were really interested in Brazilian sounds incorporated in electronic music. And I was really attracted by this because it was the same I tried to do. And after “Summer Daze” came out and was the first Basement Jaxx hit, I said to Simon and Felix, “I do this too.” It was “Belo Horizonti” and I told them, “Guys, nobody wants this track in Italy. Nobody. I went around to every label, are you interested? and because of the similarity.” And Felix said to me, “Of course. But just one thing, the intro is a little bit long.” And I said, “Felix, please, the intro is perfect.” [laughs] “You press it like this or you don’t, please.” Felix and Simon believed in “Belo Horizonti.” I say that in this stories there is… When a little DJ does a record, it’s like your son, your record. But at the same time, when it makes money, it’s not your record anymore. Because then, everybody speaks about your production except yourself. It’s incredible. At some point, it’s out of control. Emma Warren I guess you must still be getting royalty cheques from that record? Claudio Coccoluto No. Because I remember, when I spoke to Basement Jaxx about the record for the first time, it was so romantic, you know? Everybody said to me, “Wow, good. It’s a great idea, great intention.” Then only money. How many copies? Where is it licensed to? In which part of the world? I was not interested in that. This is my relation to the record. Now “Belo Horizonti” is important in my career, but it’s not as dear to me as other things. It’s like a son that went away from you. Emma Warren Obviously, you DJ a lot, but how much are you producing now? Claudio Coccoluto I stopped to produce for a while because the record scene fell out in a horrible way. And I tried to save the credibility of my little label the Dub Records in a sabbatical way. To relax, to understand what is happening. Now, I’m ready because I really feel and really believe that the market is not so bad in the dramatical way the majors say every day to us. “It’s a drama, everything is lost!” I don’t think so. I think, if you look at the downloads on the web, there are a lot of people that need music. This is a fact. Emma Warren I don’t know if this might be record label dramatics but it’s got to be a strange time to be a dance music DJ. Claudio Coccoluto I don’t think so. I think that it’s the right time. The right time because the DJ is about trust, or the people trust in DJ, because the DJ is a real operator. He’s not a rock star on the stage, far from the people. He’s in the people, in the dancefloor. And I think that if I choose this [holding record], I put my face on this, OK? If you want to say to Michael Jackson that the last one is shit, it’s impossible. If you want to say to me that I’m mixing like a dog, it’s possible. Every time, every day, every night. It’s true! That is a relation with people that give you some success, some popularity, because I think it’s thankful. It’s thankful by the people that say, thanks to do this for us in a right way. Because that’s an example of DJing that I don’t appreciate. I don’t understand. But I’m on the border. It’s so difficult to explain, because like I said before, I’m famous. It’s a great word — famous is an honored thing, because I remember that a great actor say, “You are famous when in Bangladesh, somebody writes your name in the right way. This is famous.” Not the DJ famous, [that’s a] little thing. But I don’t need this. This is only a reflection of my job. It’s OK, that’s a lot of funny things. But it’s not my goal. My goal is, two decks. [speaking Italian] This is my protection. I’m not so egocentric. I need this protection by the people. At the same time I need to relate to the people about my expression that is music. Music for me is, put the record in a way, the record is important. Chicken Lips is important. My productions can be important. But it’s little pieces in a patzo. Emma Warren Obviously a lot of people here are DJs, run clubs, play regularly. Are you saying that as far as you’re concerned, mixing and how you play the music is the most important skill a DJ has? Claudio Coccoluto Of course the mix is important becuase everything from production to other activities of DJing comes from the relationship with the crowd. Our great advantage is in real time, understanding what the people think, what the people feel. There is no musician can trade this in the same time. Because if a musician do a record, he must wait three months, four months for feedback. We have feedback in a while. I put the records, I see it on the faces and I understand if it’s good, if not, maybe it’s good. This is a background, very important when we come in a studio in relation with other musicians, because we can tell to the others what’s happened in the dancefloor. Emma Warren So, from your viewpoint from behind the decks, what does a dancefloor want right now? Claudio Coccoluto At the moment? [grabs a record] Maybe nothing from... I wanna speak about something that’s happened but is no good for me. Everybody knows Soul Central, but the original track is this. (music: Rhythim Is Rhythim – “Strings of Life” / applause) When I say that if you want to play this, play the original. Ten years ago Derrick May, I think 10 years... Emma Warren Maybe what I was asking there was what other records have you got in there that you think are so good that they shouldn’t be remixed? Claudio Coccoluto Sorry, but I have no experience by discussion like Red Bull Academy like this. I chose something with no particular order, but no, I want to listen something from Detroit, but 10 years later. This is Moodymann. Somebody knows? OK. Moodymann is a strange person, I feel so. I don’t know in person, but... He is a person that comes from the black music, for sure, with a blues attitude, with a deep attitude, that sometimes do something like... (music: Moodymann – “Dem Young Sconies”) That is very important for me. This is one of my favorite records at the moment. (music: Black Devil – “Timing, Forget the Timing”) Never a musician do this. No, never, because a musician started all the life for to put the right notes in the right place. If I produce it with my computers, and I play viola two octaves up or down, nobody say to me, “What fucking are doing?” It’s only my taste, to say to me it’s right. It’s a new sound. It’s an occasion for the fantasy. I don’t think that every musician is like this, but it’s very hard to speak with a person related with music in a strong way. Emma Warren I think that music’s always been moved on by people using their instruments or technology incorrectly, by kind of doing things that you wouldn’t do if you were trained. You wouldn’t turn everything up to 10. You wouldn’t play in a certain way. But with these kind of records, how often are you playing things like this in your sets at that moment? Claudio Coccoluto In what moment of the sets? Emma Warren No, no. Right now when you’re playing. How often will you drop one of those classics? Claudio Coccoluto Everywhere in my sets. My goal, my personal mission is to break the time barrier. I’m really bored about anyone that speaks about promo, last one, because it’s a great shame for the dignity of the DJ. What’s the meaning of last one? Every record should be a piece of art, probably is a piece of soul of the people that made it, OK? I use this with a lot of respect. This is the same reason, because I use only vinyl. Not because CD is devil, but just because... [speaks Italian] The path to arrive to something with a CD is very simple, so quickly. You have no respect about the people that made it. You go on the web, you download. In three minutes, you can play the track. If you found a vinyl, maybe that’s three days, sometimes three months, in other cases three years. But this is not worth time. It’s time to research, because research is a state of mind. If you are with research, you are with open eyes, open ear, and this is important. I need to try to find this. I spend three year of my life, but in the path I meet some other stuff. Similar, different, it’s not this, it’s like this. And my knowledge is evolved. If I go on the web and download in three minutes something about Talking Heads, I don’t know nothing about Talking Heads. I know nothing about the cover. I know nothing about the credits. Why? Music is culture. Respect for the people that made this. Arts, non-arts. Every opinion, it’s OK, but I think it’s a serious position to take. My serious position is use vinyl. Yes, it’s more comfortable going around for the world with small bags with a lot of CDs, sometimes DVDs. I saw in Ibiza a lot of DJs, they come with three DVDs. Emma Warren That’s not really worth getting into. Claudio Coccoluto You’re a DJ? Probably, I’m 40 from the old school. But I don’t speak about the vinyl or CD or something else. I speak the spirit of this job. I think it’s important that save this spirit around the possibility of technology give us. This is a remix by Chicken Lips, that is come three years ago. (music: Tango & Cash – “Dance Her (Morris Corti Cash Mix)”) If go with a production like this now to a major, an A&R, that is 16, 18, not much, it should be said to me, “That’s three or four ideas for three or four records.” This is the limit of modern music. The limit is the major attitude to say, to view in every sound, every different thing a possibility to gain. It’s not. This is music and that is not, is my opinion. Emma Warren Well, I just wanted to ask you something about this record. Obviously disco influenced Italian music, but how much did Italian music have an effect on disco? Claudio Coccoluto It’s very strange by an Italian DJ speak about Italian music. It’s very strange because we don’t feel this scene like a concrete thing. From the beginning, I tried to explain my perception is a single experience by person. There’s not a scene. Everybody does something without any relation with the world. Just listening to some records from USA, some records from UK, but without an... In this moment we are related through, me and you, probably somebody listen Gino Soccio remains something in the air and tomorrow comes some production by you that is similar or with an idea or with a feeling directed by this record, and that’s happened in Italy. Never has been two person that we must manage the way to do something. No. Very, very adventure-ly everybody produced stuff with... In a single way. Now it’s changing because it’s changing the media relation. I can publish my stuff on the web and I can receive the feedback from all over, but until 10 years ago, there’s nothing similar. Emma Warren I think one of the things that’s interesting about the disco period is the amount of second and third generation Italian-Americans who were really important in the scene: Francis Grasso, Nicky Siano, David Mancuso. Is there something about being Italian that makes you predisposed to disco or to house or to this kind of music? Claudio Coccoluto No. Emma Warren How come so many of those guys had an Italian background? Claudio Coccoluto I don’t think it is the same period. I think that’s a delay of four, five years. Emma Warren I know. Definitely, but what I’m saying is those guys who started disco in New York, many of them had Italian backgrounds. How come? Claudio Coccoluto I don’t know. [laughs] Emma Warren I was hoping you could shed some light. I’ve always wondered about this. You read a lot about these people. Claudio Coccoluto I’m sorry. Emma Warren No one’s every solved this Italian disco mystery from a New York point of view. Claudio Coccoluto Maybe my opinion about the research is true, because the research can put your goal everywhere. You start to find something, to looking for something and you find another thing. I think now Italian scene is interesting, and this is complex because now it’s changing everything like all over in the world. Everything about the technology that is the first thing. Now, the technology is democratic. Everybody can do music without great expenses. Then everybody can publish its production without a great... Audience Member Can I interrupt for a second? You said that technology is democratic, but what happens when the price of the machine is different in the U.S. or maybe eastern Europe or Africa or Australia? It’s not the same. Claudio Coccoluto I think you’re right. I agree. It is much better than in the past. Audience Member It’s the same. Claudio Coccoluto Sorry? Audience Member There’s the same imbalance. Claudio Coccoluto I don’t think so because if you think that until 10 years ago the only way to do music was go in a studio, thousands, thousands thousands dollars. Rent something or pay musician, what’s the occasion for a DJ to be a producer? Just spend money. Now with a PC and a software like, I don’t know, Live, or software like Reason, very cheapest price, you do that. It’s not so democratic like we can hope because tomorrow I hope so all over in the world it should be possible. No, I’m agree. But think 10 years ago. Do a records probably... I think I remember in ’80s, to do a record, do a mix in Italy, costava, around 10 million Lira, around 5,000 Euros. In the ‘80s. One track. Now, I think it’s democratic because the concept of democacry is not political. It’s about the possibility that you have to do music without any particular study. I’m not a musician, I don’t know any note, I don’t know what is a pentagram, but I do music. This is democratic. In older historical period I can’t do that. Emma Warren I suppose there is some basic inequalities in the world that any amount of cheap technology isn’t going to solve, but I guess your point is that now if people want to make music in the kind of countries where it’s possible to do that, then they can. That’s a good thing. I wanted to ask you, you started DJing when you were 13. You’ve done all these records, had all these hit records, become a very popular DJ. People throw around figures saying that you’re a 10,000 euro DJ to book, all these things. What’s next for you? Claudio Coccoluto The next goal is my next gig. Because I think that’s a strange paranoid for everybody that do the DJ seriously to follow the perfection of the set. The perfection don’t exist, OK? Because there’s too much variable things in a night, your moral, emotional, and immaterial things. Every time that I have a gig I think, “The next time, I’ll do it better.” The next time don’t finish, never. My wife is very disappointed about this because she has waited that I stop to go around. My goal is follow my idea of a perfect DJ. A perfect DJ is a DJ that don’t follow any pressure by the external and secondary thing. Not from the money, not from the people, not from the media, but just from the feeling. It’s like utopian idea, really pure, really probably utopical idea. I think if you choose a target, you must choose very high. I try to do the best, my best. Emma Warren You’re basically saying, “Aspiring DJs of the world, aim high.” Claudio Coccoluto No, I think but I don’t say this. Emma Warren You’re saying the aim is to aim high. Claudio Coccoluto I feel that every DJ in this room say, “I’m the best in the world,” and this is important because... [speaks Italian] Emma Warren It’s a self-belief is good for you... Claudio Coccoluto Auto-charge is very important, no? But it is not so nice to tell. Emma Warren Well listen, do you want to finish up by playing us one more tune maybe that sums up perhaps one of the reasons why you became a DJ in the first place? Claudio Coccoluto Yeah. With great pleasure I want to play something that for me is very modern because that’s a lot of elements that Carl Craig, Pépé Bradock... I put in this record. (music: Cesaria Evora – “Angola (Carl Craig’s Mix)” / applause) I love it because it’s a travel, a real travel, a travel of mind, a travel of ideas. It’s like an adventure in a forest, you know? You start from high grass, then forest, then animals, then I don’t know. This is the right spirit of the dance music because it is not only to dance, but it is good to listen. I really appreciate this is a work of... Where I find the roots of Carl Craig comes from Detroit too. But Pépé Bradock from France with probably African roots and Brazilian rhymes everything, yeah, great. It’s great. Any questions? Emma Warren Yeah, that’s right. Does anyone have any questions? Audience Member Which label is that? Claudio Coccoluto Sorry? Audience Member The label? Claudio Coccoluto Di questo? It’s from France. If you want to... Se vuoi prenderti i credits. Emma Warren OK, any other questions from around here? Audience Member Are you still producing music? You said you haven’t produced anything for a while. Are you still with your label, and still making music? What kind of music are you making at the moment. You’re a DJ and you’ve been DJing but you also say that you produce music yourself? Claudio Coccoluto I think that my job is to be DJ, and produce is my hobby. Audience Member Ah, OK. Do they feed off each other? Claudio Coccoluto Sorry? Audience Member Do they feed off each other? One feeds the other? Claudio Coccoluto Yeah. The other I open in the winter time, but it’s so difficult because at the moment in Italy it’s so difficult to found somebody to do the distribution of vinyl records of dance. Nobody wants. Audience Member What is the market... Claudio Coccoluto What? Audience Member What is Italy looking for on the dancefloor? You say they’re not interested in dance records, but I think Italy, for me, is very interested in dance records. Claudio Coccoluto Yeah, but there’s not the structure, you know? The market in Italy is so few. Nobody say to me, “OK, I’ll spend my money for your product.” But, if I want to spend my personal money for my product, it’s not possible again because I need to... Audience Member Distribution. Claudio Coccoluto Distribution my product in the world. In Italy there’s not a good situation. Audience Member Do you think there’s enough DJs in Italy? Claudio Coccoluto Sorry? Audience Member Do you think there’s enough DJs in Italy? Claudio Coccoluto There’s a lot of DJs. Too much. Audience Member Too many DJs. Do you think maybe the problem is not the fact that there perhaps is not enough record stores. Claudio Coccoluto It’s a cultural problem. Audience Member Solely cultural? Claudio Coccoluto No, I think so. Nobody knows the business to invest on the DJ music. There was in Italy until a couple of years ago UMM. Somebody may remember UMM or Media Records. There was the only record labels come from the dance that operated for the dance, and now are finished. Because the market, the rules of the market are the money. If you don’t make money, you don’t exist, simply. This is the reason, because I looking to the web like a resource, because it should be a great occasion for the dance music, electronic music. Because now the DJ is like a little media. The DJ is not like a musician. The DJ is important... This is so difficult to explain. I think that every DJ, everybody is a little radio, a radio station. I manage myself, I play myself my music, but I am free and credible, and credible, because nobody pay for, “Play this record, or not,” except somebody in the... OK. Not in every case. This is a complex system, so different from the past. The major label and the money system don’t know like manage the state of things. Now, the market is fall out because it’s compeltely new. There’s no concert, there’s no rock star. That’s Fatboy Slim with 200,000 people. This is a fact that changed completely the scene. The A&R, behind the desk, say, “What fucking is happening now?? Where I can put my money? On you? On you? On you?” Everybody can be the next rock star. Everybody. In this confusion, the market is broken completely. But that’s a great occasion for everybody, and this is my dream. Because, sorry if I repeat myself, 10 years ago, just 10 years ago, no way. No possibility. Just for Frankie Knuckles in New York or I don’t know, or Paul Oakenfold in London. Because this person was in that system of money that permit to them to do his project. Now, everybody is the owner of his life, of his project, of his career. This is historical, completely new thing in the world of the music. Emma Warren We’re just basically saying, “Bring it on being independent, and bring it on doing it yourself.” Claudio Coccoluto Sorry, bring? Si, si si. Fai da te, si. I think that it’s okay until a certain point. Then, you need somebody else, because when the game is not a game, but a great business, you need to save your soul. To save your soul, you need some person that do other things to leave the mind free to think only to the music. It’s very hard. It’s very hard. Because it’s very hard to come from a place where the flight is in delay, you arrive and the room in the hotel is not ready and then you go straight to the restaurant and then to the club like a box. When you arrive behind the desk, you must ready to do your job. Because your face, the face is your... The people don’t know that you are in delay with the flight. People know that you are Claudio Cocolutto, you must play the better set of your life, and nothing else. I do that. Emma Warren That’s an insight into the life and times of a DJ by Claudio Cocolutto, so thank you very much. [applause]

---

Title: Darshan Jesrani (Metro Area)
Date: 2015-04-22
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/darshan-jesrani-metro-area-lecture/

Darshan Jesrani (Metro Area)
Darshan Jesrani grew up in Poughkeepsie, New York, population 43,000. In this sleepy town, he started out breakdancing and (legend has it) hacking with an underground network of computer nerds. Next came music. As he told us at the 2003 Red Bull Music Academy, Darshan explored techno frontiers before starting to dig up records that Shep Pettibone had dropped on Kiss FM back in the day. Via the net he crossed paths with Morgan Geist, and they established a unique sound that put the name Metro Area firmly on the map.
Hosted by Darshan Jesrani My name is Darshan Jesrani, I record with my partner Morgan Geist under the name Metro Area and we record for Environ Records. It’s a label that is run out of Brooklyn, New York. TONY NWACHUKWU How did you and Morgan Geist come together to make sweet music? Darshan Jesrani I guess we pretty much made contact sometime in 1995 or ’96. We had some common ground in music. Our interests were similar in terms of what we were into mood-wise. Also we’re both into older styles of electronic music. We were into reviving older production sounds and techniques from before. Metro Area didn’t really start until years after we met. Initially, it was a lot of foundation building and talking about music. TONY NWACHUKWU Did you record together before under the name Metro Area? Darshan Jesrani We did a couple of tracks before. But it didn’t really go anywhere. We did one track under the name Phenom. It came out on a compilation. Some of the ideas that we use in Metro Area today were already there. TONY NWACHUKWU Did you or Morgan come up with the name Metro Area? Darshan Jesrani Morgan came up with the name. Originally, he wanted to start a house music label called Metro Area. Eventually, it became the name of our project. TONY NWACHUKWU Metro Area is definitely a testament as to how a DIY ethic works. You record your music on your own and you release it on your own label. You are building what you love to earn your living on. Darshan Jesrani Yeah, we are trying. You draw from inside yourself and you put out records that you believe in and that touch you personally. Hopefully, people catch on. I think that’s all you can ask for nowadays. For us, it’s impossible to appeal to big companies to put our music out necessarily. I mean, you can do that, of course. Some do and some people are lucky. The good thing about today’s technology is that you can be in charge of own stuff – not only of the production of the music, but the venue with which it’s released. You can also decide where the CDs and records are manufactured and so on. TONY NWACHUKWU Could you describe your working style when recording a track? Darshan Jesrani Usually, one of us would make a sketch, like a drum pattern and some other element, a bassline or a minimal arrangement of two or three sounds. If Morgan started, he would bring it over to my place or vice versa. We sort of trade back and forth. Sometimes we’ll start stuff together. If we do a drum pattern, we don’t just do one pattern. We sort of lay out the whole song; even if you’re using only one instrument or sound, you make it change. That’s the foundation for a piece of music. Unfortunately, electronic music encourages you to build your song on just one loop. Especially those who started off with sequencing tend to work this way. When you record something and loop it up, it sounds cool and you might like it. But, eventually, you will get tired of it. A loop is not a composition. TONY NWACHUKWU Yourself and Morgan hooked up in 1995. Were you DJing at that point? Darshan Jesrani Early on, most of my DJing was on college radio. I spent a lot of time doing music direction at my school station. That’s where I learned how to mix. I went to a school called Colgate University, which is in upstate New York. It’s very cold. TONY NWACHUKWU Do you still have your high school T-shirt? Darshan Jesrani No. (laughs) I went there from 1991 to 1995. It was a kind of strange school, having a very sporty culture and not so much focused on the arts. So I really got into my music and spent a lot of time with like-minded people who are also really into music. I got involved in the radio and finally did what I wanted to do. I got some support from small record labels to send me records and I did dance shows. TONY NWACHUKWU What kind of records did you play at that time? Darshan Jesrani I liked all the house stuff. There was a dance music column in a college music journal called CMJ. I would read that and follow tips. I tried to get the records that I was curious about. I put them on the play lists at the radio station, reviewed them in the show, encourage other people to do dance shows and I would try to throw parties at the school. TONY NWACHUKWU Did you dabble with making beats of your own? Darshan Jesrani Yeah, at that point I was very much into making beats. But economics really play a big part in either your ability or inability to produce music as you have to acquire some gear. It’s a lot easier now. All you really need is a computer to do sketches. You really don’t need a whole bunch of gear. But back then you did. I started off with one sampler in 1989. It was a Korg DSS-1 – a 12-bit piece of shit. [laughs] TONY NWACHUKWU [laughs] The snare was OK. Darshan Jesrani The snare was alright, yeah. And I had to split the keyboard into 16 different places. That means you get, what, like two keys per sound? You can’t do very much with that. Also I had an IBM PC with a little monochrome display. Just real old technology, [laughing], just crap. TONY NWACHUKWU But at the time, though. You can’t say that, man. You’re sitting there with your early sound player and your IBM PC, you were the man. At the time. Darshan Jesrani I could mix stuff. And that was important to me. One of the first things I did with my sampler was sampling a U2 beat and I taped the key down, so it would repeat. Over this I played little sounds. And I thought, “OK, I’m making music.” TONY NWACHUKWU Let’s play some music now. What did you bring? Darshan Jesrani I’m trying to illustrate the ideas that I had from when I started and sort of where I’m at now in music. When I play records now, I still play a lot of stuff I first got into. I feel like a little bit of a unification of my history and my music. I don’t feel like I’ve gone through a lot of different sounds and styles that have been abandoned subsequently. I feel more like a unification of my own history in a kind of cohesive way. TONY NWACHUKWU The name of the label? Darshan Jesrani Environ? TONY NWACHUKWU Yeah. Darshan Jesrani Well, Morgan kind of came up with the name for it. I think what he had in mind was he has this sort of notion of music and sound as creating environments or atmospheres and creating moods and spaces, so I think the name of the label, Environ, is just a testament to that idea. When you put a record on, when you have a piece of music that is actually creating a very effective mood or atmosphere, it’s really changing the environment in some way. So I think that’s what he was getting at. The first record I play, we did on Environ in 1998. We were inspired by a friend of ours. His name is Daniel Wang. I’ll play a record of his right after this. Basically, we didn’t sequence very much. Morgan just did a skeletal sequence of drums and synth. Then we played around using a Roland VS-880 digital multi-track. This was before recording to your computer hard drive was as accessible or ubiquitous as it is now. You already could do it, but it was a little expensive. You had to buy converters and you needed a pretty decent machine to do it. So we used this dedicated hardware unit to just layer sounds on top of each other as you would do it using a tape recorder. Basically, it is just a glorified multi-track tape recorder. Here it is. (music: Metro Area – “Atmosphrique”) The drums and the bassline were sequenced. And then we recorded the claps on top of it, we recorded our own hand claps. The idea behind this is some sloppiness is good, you know? We wanted to avoid that very rigid feel when you sequence everything. We wanted to go back to the spirit of these older records introducing a little bit of a live feel and looseness. The keyboard parts are also played and not quantized. Some mistakes are good. Otherwise, it will sound way too rigid. That was one of the things we were fighting against when we made that record. And, as I already pointed out, we were inspired by our friend Danny [Wang], who would do stuff like this. (music: Daniel Wang – “Like Some Dream I Can’t Stop Dreaming”) He made that out of samples, but it’s still very loose. That’s I think it was 1995, something like that. ’95 or ’96, Look Ma No Drum Machine EP on Balihu, and it was the first Balihu record. He’s doing really interesting music. It’s not quantized, it’s electronic and it’s groovy. So this was a very big inspiration for us. TONY NWACHUKWU Have you worked together? Darshan Jesrani No, not really. I mean, we already hung out a little bit together in the studio. But we haven’t worked together on a piece of music. I know Morgan did a remix for Danny. TONY NWACHUKWU Do you find it difficult combining your extensive DJing schedule with making music? Darshan Jesrani A little bit. When I come home from doing a gig or if you’re traveling, it always takes some time to recover and get back into the groove of making something. And especially when you’re working on a piece of music, many of you know you have to be in it. You work on it, and maybe you step away from it but your mind is still engaged with the thing you’re working on. And when you have to leave town because of a DJ gig, it takes you away from the mental world of making music. That’s the challenging part of it, is to get back home and dive back into what you’re doing. TONY NWACHUKWU Are you working on tracks at the moment? Darshan Jesrani Yeah, I’m working on a remix and Morgan and I just started some new Metro Area stuff. TONY NWACHUKWU Who started it first? Darshan Jesrani We started it together but I think for the first track, Morgan had the seed of the first ideas, the first rhythms. TONY NWACHUKWU How do you feel about that, Morgan got there first? [chuckles] Darshan Jesrani It’s cool, it’s fine, I’ll do the next one. Audience Member What do you think about licensing issues since some of your tunes have been bootlegged? Darshan Jesrani I always feel like artists should be compensated properly for their work and credit should always be given all the time. People deserve to know who made a record and the authors of the record should be compensated for their work. But there’s also that other end of things where the people want to have a particular piece of music, but it’s just not accessible. Then some people will take it upon themselves to provide this piece of music by pressing it themselves illegally without licensing it properly. I’ll buy a bootleg record sometimes – a bootleg like an old, sought-after classic. But at the same time, when you’re at the other end of the stick, it’s not so nice. For example, we had a record we did and someone took our whole track and put a vocal from another record on top of it. Now they’re playing it on 98.7 Kiss FM in New York. Our own original track would not get played on that station. I think it’s great that they play it, but at the same time they don’t know that we did it. We’re not getting any credit for it. It’s a weird spot to be in. The flattery [of being played] doesn’t necessarily outweigh the practical aspect of being credited and compensated for what you’re doing. Audience Member Would you mind if someone sampled some bits of one of your tracks, for example a snare drum? I sampled a snare of yours with a tune that begins with a kick drum and a snare drum. Darshan Jesrani No, we do the same. We take little drum sounds. We don’t mind if someone samples from us. We do the same using bits of a drum beat. We just try not to sample music. But a little drum sound? Who owns them? We probably took them from somewhere else. You’re taking them indirectly from where we took them from. Audience Member What is the difference between promoting vinyl and CDs? Do you look at it as a totally different product and target market? Darshan Jesrani Yes, definitely. I think when we were doing vinyl records we didn’t promote at all. We didn’t even do DJ mailouts. Some labels make a practice of this, others don’t. We didn’t even do that. The extent of my promoting our vinyl records is I would run around to the clubs and sometimes give away a record to the DJs that I like or that I wanted to have play the stuff. But that’s really about it. The other beautiful thing about it is vinyl is received by music enthusiasts. Vinyl is like a commodity. People talk about it. They will play a record to friends if it’s good. It’s almost self-promoting in a way. TONY NWACHUKWU What can aspiring DJs learn from your experience? Darshan Jesrani First and foremost, people should really draw from their deepest musical fascinations and things that really appeal to you musically. Don’t compromise that at all. Make this the foundation of what you’re doing. That’s the fuel of a good piece of music or DJing. When you feel something yourself is, that’s what other people are going to be into. When you have enthusaism and you’re into something, that’s when it’s contagious and people can feel it, both when you’re DJing and making music. If you really love something, people should pursue exactly what they love and nothing less. If you go along those guidelines, everything else is sort of secondary. Also, pay attention to the quality of the sound you record. Each sound you record should be clear and a strong statement, no matter how small this sound may be. It should mean something in your piece. I used to layer a lot of stuff together. Again, I was all too happy to make these sort of dense compositions where you could pull a sound out and it wouldn’t make a difference. In retrospect, I don’t think that’s the right way to go. When you have a piece of music, if you pull a sound out, it should sound incomplete. Audience Member Yesterday I saw you giving Hugh Masekela a record that you remixed of his music. I wonder if you could play that to us? Darshan Jesrani Actually, there is one more thing I wanted to talk a little bit about the notion of a remix. This issue became apparent to me when I worked on a remix for Hugh Masekela’s song “Mama.” When people are remixing today, they will usually take some samples of the original and record a whole new track. But there’s also another approach, which is what people used to do. You take the whole multi-track recording and re-adjust the individual elements. This means that the original composition and recordings will still be there, but the balance is different to achieve a different result. Maybe a couple of sounds can be added, but it’s not going over the original. The original recording is treated with respect. That’s the way people used to do a remix in the past. I learned this when remixing this track… Let me play the original first. (music: Hugh Masekela – “Mama”) That was the original track. Now I would like to play the remix we did. We just let the original track run but we rebalanced them and the sonic result is totally different. TONY NWACHUKWU What were you given to work with? Darshan Jesrani The whole recording. All the drum tracks, the trumpets, the guitars. We had the whole multi-track recording broken out into instruments. Different audio files. We had the original multi-track recordings as individual audio files on a CD. TONY NWACHUKWU Kind of construction work to do. Darshan Jesrani Yeah, basically when you put these parts into your studio environment, they should all line up and play together. Maybe the volumes will be wrong, but you can re-adjust them. (music: Hugh Masekela – “Mama” / Metro Area Birthday Dub)

---

Title: Cerrone
Date: 2015-12-08
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/cerrone-lecture/

Cerrone
During disco’s heyday, dancefloors burned red hot with the sound of Marc Cerrone: a French producer, composer and drummer whose hit 1977 album Supernature brought together live orchestral composition and the radical synthesized sounds pioneered by Giorgio Moroder. After selling millions of records worldwide, turning his impressive live performance into a successful Broadway musical and scoring film soundtracks, Cerrone’s legacy of bringing the disco sound into the mainstream endures.
In 2015 Red Bull Music Academy lecture, Cerrone discussed his high-charting single “Love in C Minor,” inventing his sound, composing Brigade Mondaine, and more.
Hosted by Patrick Thévenin Good evening to all. As you know, the Red Bull Music Academy is taking place in Paris this year, at la Gaité Lyrique. There will be many organized events, among which is a lecture with Marc Cerrone, who is perhaps the father of French disco, shall we can say. Do you accept this, or not? Cerrone Why French? Patrick Thévenin It starts again. Cerrone Like I told you: I have never made a record in France. I have always done it in England or in the United States, so I have not really… I am French by birth, but I’m not really a French musician or French singer. So, without any pretensions, no – I’m not a French disco composer. Patrick Thévenin Did you always think that you were composing music that was more international? Cerrone I have never released a record only in France. My records were always released first in the United States, or in England, but usually in the United States, and then they reached France a few months later. Patrick Thévenin A rebound. Cerrone Just to make everything clear – without any pejorative sense, or whatever. Patrick Thévenin Can you tell us where you come from, and how you got into music? Into drums? Just to remind people... Cerrone This will probably annoy them. It will be long. Patrick Thévenin No. It’s really interesting, actually. Cerrone I started playing drums by accident when I was 12 years old. I discovered that since I was unruly, and not really a good student, I would drum on the tables non-stop and get thrown out of class. In the beginning, it was under the office furniture, when I had a teacher that I didn’t like. Otherwise, it would be in the corridors. At one point, I nearly got expelled from school. At the time, my mother told me, “Listen, what will we do? You will get yourself expelled from school. If you prove yourself and manage to focus, and play music during the time that you can, at the end of the term I will buy you drums.” What an amusing idea. I didn’t even think of that. In short, what happened was that she gave me a drum kit and I started to learn how to play it. I found a friend who was the most loyal to me, whom I spent most of my time with. After a year-and-a-half, or two years I started to work in groups more often. At the age of 16, my father wanted me to continue my studies. It was absolutely impossible, so I ran away from home and continued playing music while they were still looking for me, for a year-and-a-half or two years. Whenever I heard the police in the streets, I wondered if they were looking for me. I would talk to my mother so that she knew that I wasn’t doing anything stupid, but it was music… Patrick Thévenin And where you living at the time? Cerrone Excuse me? Patrick Thévenin So where were you living at that time? Cerrone I made sure to find girlfriends that had a studio, who were students, so that I could crash there. I would take gigs on Saturdays and Sundays – balls, which I enjoyed the most – to be able to eat. And then, in the summer of ’72 – this goes way back, during the summer of ’72 – I had decided with a friend to go and panhandle on the port of St Tropez. I made a board with wheels with the drums on it, and I would play the drums solo from 7pm to 9pm: when the people would have their aperitif – even today, there are people who do that. Then I would take my bowler hat off and pass it to the people on the terrace. Eddie Barclay, who was a famous man at the time – who invented the long-player single that know today – had put a note in the hat. I saw that he had been there many times so I went to meet him after I was done. I was quite moved, and didn’t say much, and then he invited me to lunch the next day. I went to his villa, with a lot of stars as guests. I was already wondering, “What will happen?” I did not think that what would happen after that would be the drums. I thought that by 20 or 21 years old I would stop playing them. In the end, we signed my first contract really, really fast. He told me that I could not just play drums for a record – you need a group of musicians – and I told him that I had some friends with whom I had made a band. It was called Kongas – we were quite popular until ’75 – and he asked me if I could get the group from Paris to St Tropez – which I did. We played at a disco called Le Papagayo, which was a well-known disco at the time. We had a trial, then the trial turned into playing there for the whole month, and we signed a contract. At the end of August, we started working in studios. In November, we released our first single and I have never stopped since then. There, I have told you everything, I can say “Goodnight.” Patrick Thévenin And then what happened? Cerrone I learned stagecraft with Kongas. I had learned to place myself, to have a style of my own. Kongas was an Afro-rock group. Patrick Thévenin How many people were in Kongas? Cerrone There were six of us… There were two percussionists, drums, bass, guitar, keyboard, singer –seven. I formed this group, which was quite fantastic. We were the first group to sign a contract with an American record label called Buddha Records. This is when I got excited about going international, because we had gone on tour in the United States, we had gone to Japan, and I have learned stagecraft with this group. Patrick Thévenin Alright. You have learned everything, the production... Cerrone No. The production came at end of the ’70s. I have lived my life a bit by accident, but positive accidents. When life gave me obstacles, in the end, I have found that these obstacles are steps that allow me to climb higher. In ’75 – because I am telling you about my life – I had a girlfriend and she got pregnant and so, evidently, her dad told me, “You will marry her.” And I told myself, “If I keep the kid, I will have to stop playing music. I have to be serious. I have to take responsibility.” I had a son, who will be 40 years this year, and before I left the group I said, “I will make an album. It will be the conclusion of everything that I have learned,” and that’s when I produced Love In C Minor. I had gone to England because I was a fan of a studio called Trident, where Elton John and Genesis recorded. I had succeeded in hiring an engineer for a few weeks – and everything that I needed, and then I produced [Love In C Minor]. I had, of course, kept the two percussionists from the Kongas, so to support them I used this foot all the time – this rhythm which became disco. I saw that this worked very well because when we stopped performing solo, and when we did pop or rock songs, it was alright. When I did [Love In C Minor], I told myself that on top of being a drummer, I had to be a leader. I had to find a signature somewhere, so I used this rhythm all the time with a bassline to follow. I recorded a song that was 16 minutes and 30 seconds long, and I didn’t think that I would keep it at 16 minutes and 30 seconds. When we were in the studio we were all playing live. I told them that I’d record for as long as possible, and then choose the best parts and cut it up later. But when I was listening to it, I told myself that I would keep them all because I thought, really, that I would sell a dozen copies. When you produce a record with the drums in the foreground that’s 16 minutes long, it’s true that it won’t be on the radio. At one point, at the end of the album, I became a megalomaniac. Instead of listening to all of the record labels that thought that it was not releasable, and that it made no sense, it’s really because it made no sense that I thought that it had something. What I talked about earlier, in relation to obstacles that turned into steps that allowed me to climb higher, I had the courage to go to London to a record label called Island. I had 5,000 records that I had made and wanted to sell myself. A month-and-a-half later the records arrived in Paris, and, with a few friends, we tried placing five records here, 20 records there, and gradually, by placing them in clubs and offering them to discos, the buzz started to spread after a few weeks. At the time, there was a record shop that you would have recognized called ChampDisque. Gary Deschamps was the DJ in there. This is where we went to search for American records that would have been released in France nine months later, what we would have called an “import.” I had given [Gary] 10 records, then 20, then 50, and he told me, “Your thing is really enjoyable.” And as the guy was talking to me like I am talking to you, I had my picture on the record cover. He never connected the dots. Then one day, he told me, “Listen, give me 300 and we will do the accounting at the end of the month.” Me, I was really happy. I had just one condition. I told him, “Put them all in the display window.” He puts them in all in the display window and after 48 hours, he calls me. I thought that he had sold them all. He said, “No, no, no, I have a stupid intern” – it’s not an intern, it’s a sales boy – “who instead of sending back 300 defective or unsold Barry White records to a New Yorker wholesaler, he has sent yours. By the time it reaches here, deliver me 50 more.” We delivered the 50, but the 300 never came back. When he opened the box, the American wholesaler saw the record cover and was shocked. I reiterate: we are in ’76, so he wants to listen to it. He listens to it and then he says, “Wow, I want to play this in a disco.” The guy who opened the box was a DJ during weekends in the euro clubs in New York, and when he played them the public went up to the booth and said, “What is this? What is this?” So, he sold those 300 records straight from the booth. This made quite an impact in New York. Some friends came to see me and told me, “Your record is working quite well in the US.” I thought that it was a joke. I lost two months because of that, and then it was time for Midem which was, at that time, in December. It’s the records fair in Cannes and I was telling myself, “Maybe, if there’s work, I will try and go to Midem,” all the while thinking, “I will have a kid.” I couldn’t let go. So, I went to Midem and I saw a magazine called Billboard, which is a bit like the bible of music for the whole world, and I saw that my song was listed [in it]. To cut a long story short, I went to New York with a friend and rang the doorbell of the first record label I went to (which was the biggest, Atlantic Records), and they welcomed me in. I signed the contract with Atlantic. The result: a no 1 record, three million albums sold. There… Patrick Thévenin There is also a story that you had told me long ago. There was cover of the title track, “Love In C Minor,” because they didn’t know who the original was by… Cerrone Ah, you know that story. This will probably be a bit long. Of course, when we had buzz in New York, the record labels checked the album cover and found “Printed in England” on it. They looked for my name in England, but nobody knew me. There was another label called Casablanca, where Donna Summer and Giorgio Moroder were, and they made a cover of it. What’s a cover? It’s an identical copy. That became a top-ten record. When I went to see Atlantic, I told them, “Wait – this is a cover. The original is mine.” I had to prove myself (that was quite easy to do) and, of course, we signed immediately. Three months later, they launched my original, which killed the cover and was an enormous success. Patrick Thévenin All right. What was it like in the ’70s for a young musician, who’s interested in discos, and that clubbing spirit that gave birth to the DJ? Cerrone There was nothing. It was instinctive. At the time, discos were starting to emerge. What was the difference between the discos, and those before them? Before, they were called nightclubs. The nightclubs would play about half an hour of music for dancing, and then half an hour of slow music. But there was a new trend called discos. From the age of 20, I went to discos, not nightclubs. It was all a coincidence… Patrick Thévenin What were they playing in the discos? Cerrone Like we say, you need to have a minimum of talent to do this job, but you especially need to be at the right place at the right time, and to feel in it your gut. You also need to know how to surround yourself with talent. I believe that you need to be around talented people, because you can’t make a record by yourself. You don’t start a career by yourself. There are plenty of people that are around, and you need to choose carefully – these people can also change your style and confuse you, but others, on the other hand… When you are young, you have a tendency to believe the people who are in the job, so you have to be very, very careful. When people ask me what they need to do to be successful… well, you need to have a minimum amount of talent, especially the talent of knowing how to make it known, which I am explaining to you. Patrick Thévenin You also have a strong personality, since you slammed the door on Barclay because they wanted to make Kongas a pop group… Cerrone It’s always a principle. When you have the opportunity to be seen and to be interested in people who are more talented than you, you shouldn’t let it go. You have to be up to the challenge. You have to be assertive. You have to fight, to be up to the challenge – and then afterwards, grow. But it’s not because someone big, important and talented is interested in you that you say, “This is it, I have reached my goal.” In this job, especially today, there are many people who think that they have succeeded because they have signed with a record label or they have a promising success, and that is it. They have succeeded. On the contrary – it is like surfing. This is how it works. I always try to live up to expectations of the doors that open. Patrick Thévenin After [Love In C Minor], was there a pressure weighing down on you, or…? Cerrone There is also sadness because the TV channels in France, which I had told you in the beginning of the interview… it was not released in France. It was released [in the USA]. It was only when it was a success there that it came back to France. So, like we say, “Nobody is a prophet in his own land.” This embarrassed me. I had my family and my friends in France, and I was telling myself that it was a lucky strike, and that it would not go on. I was taking advantage of everything that was coming to me and opening to me – tours, television, money, glory – because from the moment I produced by myself, I didn’t sign an artist contract. I signed a label contract. They are not the same thing. I was taking advantage of it all because I thought that it would all stop in a few months’ time. Never would I have thought then that I would make a second album called Paradise, which was quite as successful, and after that a third album which came out two years later, Supernature. This is where everything started. This is really where – between Grammy awards, between eight million albums – the change started. I began to think that maybe a career was starting for me, so I had to pull my weight, I had to surround myself with the right people, and work harder. In any case, I had to be up to the challenge and to whatever was happening to me. Patrick Thévenin There was something quite modern about this period – you created a sort of global package with your record… an image, a lifestyle, with your album covers… Cerrone With [Love In C Minor], everything I have done… like I explained, my path in life, between Kongas, is about this excitement and discovery. The album cover, for instance, which was supposed to be a concept that guided the musical direction. From the time that you have a concept that works – that pleases you, because it’s what you wanted – you carry on. By the third album, the principal title was supposed to be the first single, “Give Me Love.” During the sessions, I had always stayed at Trident because Trident had opened doors for me. It was my studio during the year. They sent me a synthesizer called the Odyssey. I did not even know how to switch it on. It was one of the first synthesizers. The first thing that I had played was a note – “ta-ta-ta-ta-ta-ta” – which was the birth of the sequencer, in fact. “Supernature,” the song, happened while I was playing it and enjoying myself one afternoon. The concept was done. After that, I surrounded myself with the right talent. We produced “Supernature” and evidently, when it was completed (it was also nearly 20 minutes long), with the concept in three phases, I went to Atlantic with it. Since my record label was American, not French, they said, “No. We have worked for two years to build your orchestration – your musical style – between Love In C Minor and Paradise – and you’re coming to us with… what is a synthesizer?” We were at the end of ’77 – beginning of ’78. I fought quite hard and I managed to persuade them. Because I did not have an artist contract (it was a label contract), I told them that if you do not want to release Supernature, then you don’t have a third album, or you don’t have an artist. “How come we don’t have an artist? We signed with you for five years.” “No, you signed with a label. The label has only signed with Cerrone for two albums.” So, how did I do it ? I end up blackmailing them a bit, and they accepted. It was not business. I did not prepare any of that. It was spontaneous, like a kid defending himself, like when I first ran away from home because I really wanted to go to the limit. In short, Supernature was a colossal success. Then I met a writer called Lene Lovitch, who was part of the original punk movement and a 180-degree turn from the “Love me,” sexy stuff: very playful… “Supernature” was rather cold compared to what I had done before. With her, an environmentalist, writing… few people cared about it at the time. They told me, “You are doing this on purpose. You want to commit suicide. You are on the branch that will kill yourself.” I said, “No, I am making the tree bigger. Have faith in me.” Well, it was done. Supernature was very, very important. Patrick Thévenin And how did you have so much confidence in yourself, when you said that? Cerrone Megalomania, I think. Not to confuse megalomania and mythomania, though. They are very close, but they are not the same thing. A megalomaniac delivers, and a mythomaniac dreams. When the passion is serious... it’s the fact that you don’t believe that it will last, so you don’t have anything to lose. You do not plan for a future in the spotlight. I have never liked having the spotlight on me. My delight was the stage. I learned stagecraft with Kongas, and then it was to spend time on stage on my own. I tried to go as far as possible, so that I could emerge in three or four years’ time to play live, and I couldn’t really believe it. Patrick Thévenin From the moment you discovered the Arp – which is a synthesizer that would shake things up quite a lot– we did not really know what you worked with. You didn’t really talk about your equipment, your synthesizers, your favorite gear. How do you produce a Cerrone track? Are there other musicians, or are you on your own? Cerrone During the time of Supernature, I found a guy who knew how to use synthesizer. There was IBM, at the time, for accounting – that’s what IT was for. It was this guy called Jonathan Jeczalik, who had created the group Art of Noise. He was so talented. I had written the main tune – the construction, the sound direction – but at the end, the people that you have around you bring their own talents to the track. Moreover, since I have group training, I still do a lot of stage performances. I do not have an artist’s mind, like a singer, with all these musicians who are jumping on a bandwagon. If there is a team spirit, then everybody will participate. I need others. It’s really important to me. It’s reassuring to me. It’s also quite encouraging to go find a girl like Lene Lovitch, who we do not really see very often. She played a role – very gothic and punk. She was insane. She was like Hare Krishna. She was roaming the streets barefoot. We were at Piccadilly Circus with a friend called Alain Visniac, who I worked with on Supernature with, and we see this chick with a stuffed pink bird on her head. She was a redhead, and she was wearing a green dress, and we were nearly laughing. “What was this?” When we were laughing, she started playing the tambourine. She comes to us and says, “Why are you laughing?” We were teasing her a little bit, “What are you doing here? You are dressed like a Christmas tree.” “And you? What do you do?” “We are musicians.” “Oh yes?” And suddenly, I am inviting her to come join us at night at the studio. She accepts. She shows up, and we spend some time together, this and that… Supernature has a number of rhyming couplets, and since my label is called Malligator, I told her that I wanted the title to sound like “Mal-ali-ga-tor.” It couldn’t be “Mal-ali-ga-tor” of course, but it had to fit with the number of couplets. So, we needed a background. I had given her a copy of The Island Of Dr Moreau, and at that time… well, it was the first wake-up call for the global community. “We’re fucking up globally. We’re going to destroy everything. We’re fucking it all up.” This was the time of the first oil crisis. We started to realize where oil came from, why we were all driving cars, that it was being pumped… it all came from this era. And that very night, she came up with the title, “Supernature”. I found it really amazing. We spent days and weeks after that learning the lyrics, and the lyrics are trendier today than at the time that they were written. She also got a Grammy Award for her lyrics. I also need to say this: at the time of Love In C Minor, I had the opportunity to be in the right place at the right time. It’s the heavens that give you this chance. To make a career, you also need to have a measure of good fortune – more than the rest – and this is either given or not. Me, I had this opportunity because, at the birth of Studio 54, I had the chance to be out drinking with friends at night. When I was in a gang, there was Warhol, Gaultier, Goude – all these guys who were total agitators in their fields. Great talents. Gaultier was showing off his pointy bras, Goude was cutting his girlfriend, Grace Jones, into lots of little pieces, and Warhol – well, that goes without saying. When I was surrounded by a bunch of people like them, I had the good fortune of being the youngest to participate. I think that Gaultier was the same age as me. We were freaks, provocative freaks, but we had success. We were all excited. When I was telling you earlier about megalomania: it’s also about your environment. You see what I mean? When you see Gaultier making his pointed brassieres, it pushes you and you started talking. The next day, when you are in the studio, you are not humble. You are driven. You are motivated. Either way, it was an extremely creative period that created the legacy that we see today: in whatever style, in the colors, in the textures; this period had been extremely rich, creatively. I had the good luck to be at the right place at the right time, which means that I had the chance to have a long career. Patrick Thévenin With the success of Supernature and all of that, I can imagine that you’re quite wealthy. Cerrone That was not really the motivation for me. Patrick Thévenin OK, but what was the life of Cerrone like at the time? Were you in discos every night? You were between Warhol and Studio 54, and it was about the parties? Cerrone There were 200 concerts, and TV appearances. I was never at home. I was constantly on the road. I was taking advantage of that in a greedy kind of way, because I was sure that it would not last, and then after that… things happen when you have success and you attract media attention. Luck strikes, which happens today [as well]. Today it’s a lot clearer, because people communicate and aren’t afraid to speak out. In my time, it was the birth of that. You have the best stuff and people propose lots of stuff to you, so they asked me, in France, we were asked to do this concert, in the equivalent of Bercy [arena] today, it was in Pantin, I agreed but I had conditions because my heart wasn’t in it. I said that I will have a concert and I will have a pyramid made of Plexiglas. It was 16 meters tall and wide, could open and turn around, and it became the interface for stage lighting. In our world we had nothing to lose – you become really provocative – so I said that we would blow smoke out of it when it opens and have five naked girls and guys. Evidently, the French media said, “How dare he?” In the beginning of the show the women were the first to stand up, and the guys were staring like that – and I repeat, you have to remember the era – and the ladies were shocked, then we see the guys, who were also naked. Naked. Then it was the guys’ turn to be embarrassed, as I had picked the right guys. It was provocative. And then the guys were embarrassed because their wives were happy to see a magnificent creature getting naked. If you did that today, it wouldn’t mean anything. It’s really important to keep the era in mind… It was a total provocation, knowing that this would attract the media’s attention. I stayed in Paris for three days before going back to the United States, because I had started living in the United States. I have lived there for 22 years. Patrick Thévenin Would these protests probably not happen today? The woman on the fridge, with a yoghurt stain – can we interpret that as...? Cerrone Today, when you see that… Patrick Thévenin You don’t think that you would have the feminists on your back? Cerrone Today, when you see the video clips of American singers, I think we have reached a peak. Patrick Thévenin Yes – but you are a man. Cerrone I think that we are more acceptable of profanity today. It passes close to vulgarity. People have always complained that I am provocative, but it was that era. There were other French guys who were provocative – like Gainsbourg. You have to say that it was also in an era that was very provocative. Gaultier and Goude, these guys, they are agitators. I wasn’t the only one to provoke. I was motivated to be provocative through music and since I was the only one to do it on a musical level, that’s why it has lasted. I wasn’t the only one, though. We were part of this movement. Today, everyone goes on about pushing the limits, but if a singer, French or American, goes on stage wearing a thong, we just say “Yeah – seen it all before.” There. It’s really important to put things in context. Patrick Thévenin Alright. And does it correspond to the life at that era – a life of debauchery? Cerrone Now you are going into my private life. Patrick Thévenin Alright. From Supernature, there is something different happening in the sound that we would call “euro disco” where Europe claims disco as its own – was that an opportunity for you? Cerrone There is nothing rude about not wanting to be classed as a French musician. I have never been categorized as “euro-disco.” My records were in the American charts. They were not “euro disco.” Why do you want to label me as French? Patrick Thévenin Because you invented a sound. And when you think of “Supernature,” which was released before “I Feel Love”… Cerrone This sound was not invented in France. The only thing that tethers me to France… Atlantic Records always told me, “Don’t say that you are French in your interviews. This will discredit you.” Since I am Cerrone – it’s Italian: my family is Italian and we feel Italian – they were telling me, “Say that you are Italian.” But I was still born in France. I was never given American nationality, even though I have been asked to do it, because for all these years, I was happy. I find that France is still very intellectual and quite sophisticated. I always wanted to stay French. In short, in interviews where I managed to show myself as French, I got asked, “What is the French side of you that remains? Your musicians are English or American, the singers are American, and you do everything in English. Your lyrics are in English. There is nothing left.” And I would say, “Yes, there is a French touch...” And that’s when the word got out. What is a “French touch”? It’s precisely that I did not go to America to try to teach you how to do it. I only copy you, but with a little French gimmick. Because it is true, I have spent my life trying to copy the Americans. I love the English, I loved the Americans, and I only copy them. Daft Punk, in ‘95, when that happened, either they, themselves, or it was the media, they rekindled this “French touch.” Then David Guetta picked up on it again. Today, “French touch” really says something. The French credibility really says something. But it’s the only thing that links me to France. Euro-dance, euro-disco, French disco… Patrick Thévenin Euro-dance is not the same thing as euro-disco. Cerrone Yes. I am trying to say that this doesn’t concern me. Patrick Thévenin You don’t have the impression that there is a “Cerrone touch,” then? Cerrone It’s true. Wait – I was living in the United States. I wanted to tell you. I have never recorded in France. I only worked with American musicians. What is left? There is only me left who is French – the mind. When you work with people with talents – session musicians who record 12 hours per day… Often when I say, “People with talents,” I mean people who do not just hold meetings. I am talking about people from the group. Like I told you: I worked with Santana’s band and Jimmy Page from [Led Zeppelin] to make my guitar sounds. I am not talking about people from the studio who play with Enrico Maccias – the poor thing, because I like him a lot – or others. This is not how I worked. I would try to take advantage of my situation to go and look for guys at the top of their game. Since my style was quite new and young, this got them excited. It drove them to work with me. I made my fifth album with Toto. Toto were quite huge at the time. This made them laugh, but… the whole of my fifth album was made with all of the members of Toto, except the drummer. They did not come to play French disco. They came to play with Cerrone. It’s not disco. It’s just a good sound. Then disco came and all the record labels saw this phenomenon, with Giorgio Moroder, Chic, and myself. There were maybe four or five names that were huge hits and selling a lot of records. What did the major companies do? They took their local [pop] artists, that would be people like Sheila in France, and they got… I don’t know. I wasn’t around, but I heard about it. Nile Rogers, who had made a record for [Sheila], he was the one who told me about it. They signed the most important local artists who made disco, but this was not disco. Disco is an atmosphere. It’s the DJs who… it’s thanks to the generations that followed – and are still here today, after 40 years – that I’ve been remixed and sampled and all of that. What did the whole world sample? They took the basic groove. The bass and drums. They didn’t sample the more obvious disco stuff, the violins… And I have lasted thanks to this, you see. I have nothing, as you said, to do with French disco. I am telling you again, I have no concerns with that. But there, you… Patrick Thévenin At the time, a French disco scene was emerging with people like Space, Voyage, Martin Circus, all that… Cerrone I was not in France. I didn’t know them. Patrick Thévenin You do not want… Cerrone No. I will not lie to please you. Patrick Thévenin Alright, what is also interesting about that time is that you were very prolific. You were producing nearly one album per year, and you had lots of projects. Cerrone We are nearly finished a new album. We are in the mixing process right now. When you say that I release one album per year, that means that in 40 years means I have produced 40 albums. When they release the next one, next spring, it will be the 18th album. Patrick Thévenin I mean from the ’70s to the ’80s. In 1980, with the Brigade Mondaine project, everything that you did on Malligator, when you produced for Don Ray and many Cerrone releases after that… Cerrone In the first seven years, I produced many records. You have certain periods that are more creative than others. You have certain periods where stuff is happening, just like that. At one point, when I left Kongas and the group disbanded, I was a bit embarrassed. The two percussionists had come to play with me – they are still with me, it’s been more than 40 years, two generations… I was a bit embarrassed that I had broken up the group, so I wanted to help them. I met a fantastic guy back in the day. I was a fan of him. He was called Steve Winwood, from the Spencer Davis Group, he made “Give Me Some Loving.” One night, as we were drinking… it was the birth of mash-up. We were mixing up two titles. “I would really like to mix up some Afro thing with whatever I did with Kongas and ‘Give Me Some Lovin’.’ Would you be OK with that?” He told me, “OK, go on. Do it and then send it to me.” I did it and he said, “I love it. How do we do it?” And I said, “We’ll make it 50/50. I don’t care. We will sell a dozen.” And this was a huge hit. It was “Africanism” [by Kongas and “Give Me Some Lovin’.”] Patrick Thévenin Can you talk about Brigade Mondaine, which was a separate project discovered by… I am sorry but it’s a bit…? Cerrone He really wants to tie me to France, right? Patrick Thévenin No, no. This is a project… It was re-released last year, and it hadn’t been available for a long time. Are you aware of the modernity of this record today? And that… Cerrone I have been told that that record is my house record. Patrick Thévenin A guy like James Murphy from DFA would like this kind of disco… Cerrone I will tell you how it happened. I was on a promotional tour in France. I was staying for eight days. I was spending an evening at Palace and I met a [writer] called Gérard de Villiersm. He was telling me that he wanted to become a film producer and that he would launch a new series called Brigade Mondaine. We had like three, four, five or seven glasses of Scotch – cheers to you – and I said, “Yes, so?” He asks me, “Would you agree for me to have ‘Give Me Love’? I think it suits the film quite well,” and I told him, “Yeah, go on.” The next day, I don’t even remember it. And then after that, I received a telex – we didn’t even have fax machines yet at this point – and the guy tells me, “I’m serious. I really will take ‘Give Me Love’ for Brigade Mondaine.” “Well…” “Go on.” “OK.” One thing led to another and he asked me to do the music for the film. I didn’t really have the time, but I did it in 48 hours. At night, I had this screen, we had these big tapes. I’d watch it, and I was just having a laugh. I did it just like that, by accident. And today, when [the record label] Because told me, “It’s been years, and there are still fans of Brigade Mondaine…” I had made another one – since the first one was a hit, and the film soundtrack was a gold record, we made a second one. And then I made a third one. Patrick Thévenin And then, after that, you stopped? Cerrone And then, after that, I stopped. We stopped then. The other one – Gérard de Villiers made four. The fourth one was less lucky. It was a flop. But I wasn’t part of that one – just the first three. When Because told me, “We are reissuing them,” I was like, “You are crazy.” They were never released in the United States. I had asked them to not release it in the United States, because I thought that it was not… they were demos. I was playing around. So today, when I am told what I am told, I feel flattered but I don’t want to dwell on it. Patrick Thévenin It’s like Malligator. There are many records released on Malligator which are hard to find now. But why is it called Malligator? Cerrone People have often asked me that. Kongas, it’s what? It’s African. So, what did I do? I took an African logo, crocodile, and “Love In C Minor” was released, the first vinyl of “Love In C Minor” is Alligator with the same logo. This logo anyway, was the Kongas’ logo. Since it was me who brought it, I kept it. The “Love In C Minor” album was a hit, and there was a label – a small jazz label – that attacked me, saying that we were here before you, we were called Alligator. I went to see a lawyer and I said, “What do I do?” He asked me, “What is your name?” I told him, “Marc.” He told me, “We will call it Malligator.” Ah, this sounded alright. God my name is not Robert, it would have been called Ralligator [laughs]. There you are. Patrick Thévenin Will everything that was on Malligator one day get out? Because records is trying to do that in France, and Warner, for the rest of the world… Cerrone Everything is getting rereleased. Yes. Patrick Thévenin Alright. Cerrone It’s a gift. But even though I take much pleasure in telling you about Supernature, Love In C Minor, that Brigade Mondaine… I did it like that. Patrick Thévenin You do not have to… you’re wrong. Cerrone It was released and then the critics were rather nice, but well… Patrick Thévenin There is something very particular with you… you play disco on the stage when it’s really music for a disco, on vinyl. Is it hard to adapt live? We have the impression that it’s really… Cerrone I do not play disco on stage. I play my music on the stage. All the people who see me on stage, they’ll tell you that it’s not really disco. It’s more funk. The musicians are more funk than disco. I insist on that, because I know that in France, disco has a connotation without any pejorative meaning, really. Disco in France is considered like “Born To Be Alive,” or Sheila. Patrick Thévenin This has changed since then, right? Cerrone Give me some names. Go on, I am the one asking the questions now. What is French disco? Patrick Thévenin Well, you [laughs]. Groups like Space, people like Bernard Fevre... there is something. I am not saying that, but I think… Cerrone But I am talking about today. Patrick Thévenin Today, the disco has a more pejorative meaning than what it had… Cerrone When I hear people like Justice, Daft Punk, Breakbot, they are not disco. It’s Breakbot, it’s Justice, it’s Daft Punk – it’s their music. They are influenced by American disco, but not by “Born to Be Alive” or Patrick Juvet, I mean, I am telling you – I don’t really have any animosity against all these artists who have their own talents, but you are talking to me as if you can go to butcher and buy shoes. You see what I mean? It’s not the same thing. Excuse me. He is insisting. I am not listing them according to their values, but we cannot mix the red and the blue. They are different. Patrick Thévenin And when people like Lindstrøm… Cerrone I will explain to you. Disco, it’s not a song. It’s a musical atmosphere. It means that there is an ambience. We don’t care about the length. Besides, in disco, there are no three-minute-long songs. You have to take your time. It’s like seduction… you do not seduce in three minutes. You need some time. Disco is an atmosphere of seduction, which puts you in a feel-good, party atmosphere. It’s not a song. It’s an introduction. You have a verse, a chorus, a bridge, and you finish with a verse. The artistic and musical construction – the DJs did not miss the point, they really understood. All of the hits today, whether it’s Guetta or others, who are really considered as among the great ones today who are French, we won’t say that they are playing disco, yet they are playing dance music. But when you see the artistic and musical conception, I’m forced to fold on my new album. They have a construction that is not like that of a song, like French disco. They are creating an atmosphere. Why is that? They are performing. They are playing in front of a public and at a certain moment, they raise it. It’s directing a musical show, and this is genius when it’s done with talent. It’s not a song in the sense that there is brass and that there is a foot all the time, with violins and disco. No, it’s not the same thing. It’s as if you are talking about a high-end fashion show and regular fashion show. You see – it’s not the same thing. I am not saying that disco is a high-end fashion show, but compared to DJs and compared to the professional world, it’s different. It’s the atmosphere. It’s not the song – even though you need tunes – and the DJs have really, really understood that. What did the DJs sample? From Nile Rogers, Chic or myself – even though we are the two who have been the most sampled – they just sample loops. They cannot translate. And believe me, they try to translate, because when they sample, this costs them 50% of their rights. For me, they try. If they agree to lose 50% of their rights, it’s because of this atmosphere that I’ve tried to define for you. The difference between French disco, especially – if there is any disco I don’t want to be tied to, it’s French disco, because that is just songs turned into disco… True disco – pure disco – there have not been many artists. There was Moroder, Donna Summer, there was Chic, Kool & The Gang, and Earth, Wind & Fire, perhaps me – there are not 50,000 of us. Patrick Thévenin At one point in the ‘90s, you started producing huge shows that were quite fantastic. Cerrone It was by accident. Like I told you, the pyramid in France, which was a huge hit at end of the day… I spent two days there and I remember it quite well, because it was the birth of my second son. It was the 2nd and 3rd December 1979. It was for the release of my fourth album “Je Suis Music” – that was a really huge hit. Evidently, because the Americans asked me, the English asked me, they asked me everywhere – it started from there. Then I set the standards higher and higher and had the opportunity to be part of a great event in Japan, for the launch of its first high-definition TV satellite [in 1991]. I helped to create a big event for the arrival of the millennium in Los Angeles and with the Dalai Lama [in Nice in 1996], and the bicentenary [of the French Revolution] in Paris in 1989, which Jack Lang asked me to come back to France for. Jean-Paul Goude did the day show, and I did the evening show. There was a combination of circumstances. Patrick Thévenin This corresponds to a period when your music was less trendy? Cerrone This corresponds to a period where the music I make is nearly outdated. I got out because I was performing a lot, but we were nearly in a period when we are old fashioned. Patrick Thévenin And how do you live with that? Cerrone I don’t care. I was doing the big events performing for 800,000 people in Tokyo – with colossal budgets, for the launch of first high-definition TV satellite, and you are asked to produce the first hour of the program, what do you have to lose in not knowing where the disco is? Patrick Thévenin Alright. At that time, you say that you didn’t want to keep playing music? Cerrone But no. Patrick Thévenin What brings you back to the foreground? Cerrone I had produced a comedy for Broadway that played for 10 months. It was a sell-out, a huge hit – you are far from all this. Patrick Thévenin You were writing books? Cerrone I was writing booklets for fun. The actor Alain Delon came to eat at my place one day and we got on well with each other. He was in love with Mireille Darc, who was adorable, and we started to get on. My shows and my albums are quite conceptual. One day, I was reading my sheets – there were about 15-20 pages – and I thought, “Are you sure?” He told me, “You have to push on,” I told him, “I will try to live up to your expectations.” This is yet another accident. Fifteen days later, I finished writing Dancing Machine. The film, with Delon and Patrick Dupond, was released in ’89. I got them to read it in ’87. They told me, “Wow, see – I told you to push on,” but it took seven to eight years. That was not wasted time. He asked me, “Do you want to do the film or will I do it?” And I told him, “Are you allowing me to say whether I am OK with directing the film?” Because at the time, he was still a huge star. He said, “Yes, I am going to see a friend called Pierre Lescure,” who was the president of Canal Plus. Between ’77 and ’80, Pierre Lescure would write to me. He was working with Europe 1. He was a journalist and writing a biography. This helped him to connect with people. So, I went to see him at Canal when he was a big boss. I was passing through Paris and I got him to read it. I told him that Delon had agreed to be part of it and that I would really like to have Patrick Dupond be part of it, too. He’s the star of the Parisian opera today, and the President of L’Opera de Paris. He said, “Wow. You are preparing a lot of stuff. If you can confirm that the others will be involved, I will work with you on the production.” That was done. I went to see TF1 and in four months, we set everything up. The film was released and it was reasonable success. Many producers and screenwriters sent me their scripts after that, but I am not a cinema producer. I did one, period. I only make music that I enjoy and I only have one goal – to remain in it as long as possible. It’s not the money or the spotlight that interest me. It’s living what I’m living today with a well-hidden private life, to put things in perspective, because the job can be quite overwhelming. I try to put things in perspective. Patrick Thévenin You did not really write for other people, aside from La Toya… Cerrone La Toya Jackson, yes… Patrick Thévenin How was it? Cerrone I knew a producer back in the day called Jackie Lombard. I had met Michael Jackson on a few TV shows and at the Grammy Awards, and she called me and asked me, “Would you like to produce for Michael Jackson’s little sister?” I said, “Yes, of course.” She asked me, “How will you do that?” I said, “Bring her to me,” and she brought her to me a few hours later. I was living in Los Angeles and she brought Michael’s mother and La Toya to my house. It was as if she was Michael’s little doppelganger. We listened to some music and we spent hours and hours together. Her mother spent some time with my wife. La Toya and I spent about five or six hours together in the studio, I gave her some tapes of that time, and she got Michael to listen to them. I met Michael three days later in his studio, and he asked me, “Where will you do that?” I said, “There are so many studios in LA – we will find something.” Then he said, “Well, why don’t you do it at my place?” He was producing the Bad album at the time. I listened to the first take of it. I did it at his place and that’s how the story goes. Patrick Thévenin Can we say that your return to the stage came from Bob Sinclar? Cerrone No. He ties me to France, again. Patrick Thévenin There’s a problem here. Cerrone No, no, I don’t have a problem but I am trying to set the record straight. The moment where we were launching Cerrone by Bob Sinclar, you know the album Cerrone by Bob Sinclar? It was him who came to see me in ‘98 and asked for a sample to do “I Feel For You.” Here, too, we did it 50/50. For “I Feel For You,” the musical basis was “Look For Love,” one of the tracks on album four. He added a tune to it. I told him, “You really want to sample my ’70s sound. Meet me in LA. You can do that with my studio with my back-up singers, my voice arrangers.” He was quite happy, and that’s what he did. He came to LA, had my back-up singers and had my sound. He released “I Feel For You” and it was a hit. One night, at The Bain Douche, in 2000, I meet a guy called Pascal Negre, the president of Universal. He tells me, “You know, we have to release a masterpiece,” and I tell him, “It’s not a masterpiece, but I am producing the arrival of the millennium in Los Angeles. It’s in Hollywood, with a budget. It’s a huge event and I love doing that.” I’m a little seasoned at it. I had done quite a lot and they were successful. Why do I care about releasing a masterpiece? I did not even know where dance music was at the time. It was the arrival of the DJs. I told him, “Listen – if I find a concept one day, I will give you a call.” We were having lunch with Bob Sinclar, and I asked him, “What do you think about doing a DJ set?” I’ll give you all of my masters. You do not do any remixes. You only use originals. Don’t add another note, mix them on your computer and send them back to me.” He said, “I would love to do that,” and I said, “Alright, try it and if you manage to do it, it will be called Cerrone by Bob Sinclar,” and he was like, “Wow, great. I am excited.” He sends them back to me a month later and it sounded alright. I send them on to Pascal Negre, he makes it a hit, but there is no single. So, what I did was re-produce “Give Me Love” in Los Angeles with new voices and a new tune. The single became a success and the album becomes a huge hit. Period. It’s a DJ set, not a remix. Can you imagine the importance that it had for me at the time? Who was trying to produce a huge thing? This made no sense. So, evidently, coming to France does not make me unhappy. America was changing. There was 9/11, the coming of Bush… the American mentality was not good. France asked me to return, so I am happy to come and spend more time here. My wife and I got an apartment, and then I was asked to do something at The Olympia. I said, “Yes,” but I had a concept. I wanted to play from midnight until 6AM and transform the Olympia music hall into a disco. They told me, “You’re crazy.” I said, “We will take out all the seats and turn it into a disco, have DJs play before and after I play live, in the style of Studio 54 or Le Palace from the time.” We did one and it was a hit, so we did another one a year later. I went to the US and they told me to do something huge in France. I remember seeing, at the end of the ’80s, Pink Floyd perform at Versailles. I said that I would really to do it at Versailles, but then I said to myself, “They will never allow me to have drummers in front of the Palace of Versailles. You have 800 cars, tourism – it’s an industry. It’s money. They will never allow it.” It happens that I convinced everybody, the government, the mayor, the police commissioner. In short, we did it and we had 100,000 people there. So, this connection to France… you need one-and-a-half years to do something like that, so I came back to and stayed in France. I still live in France now. Patrick Thévenin So, you did...? Cerrone I am officially French, even though I’ve spent more than half my life elsewhere. In any case, in the coming weeks, I will be half in France, half in LA. I miss LA a lot. When you’ve spent 22 years of your life in LA, with your kids, who were born there… Patrick Thévenin Right now, you are recording… Cerrone I am near the end of a new album. Patrick Thévenin What motivates you? Cerrone I have magnificent people working with me. Musicians like Beyoncé’s wonderful stage bassist. I have Stevie Wonder’s stage keyboard player. I have a guitarist who is a wonderful guitar player. We also have vocal features. I have Aloe Blacc... I even did a duet with a stellar drummer called Tony Allen, who is really the main reference for Afrobeat, and also with a French group called Breakbot. I have forgotten some of the best but it’s an album. It’s been eight years since I last released a new album. I will be really happy when it’s finished. It will be released in spring. Since we are not looking for any spotlight, we’re releasing the first songs, the least commercial songs, in December – for instance, the one with Tony Allen. Patrick Thévenin [The EP] is called “Afro”? Cerrone Exactly. Patrick Thévenin I had the chance to listen to it. Cerrone And the title [of the track with Tony Allen] is “2nd Chance.” It has nothing to do with waiting for a second chance, though. Patrick Thévenin Alright. That is also the return of the Cerrone percussionist. Cerrone It’s quite close to Brigade Mondaine. Patrick Thévenin The other Kongas, it’s Brigade Mondaine… Cerrone Yes, yes. Exactly. Patrick Thévenin So, you see, there was no need to be embarrassed about Brigade Mondaine. Cerrone Well, this was made spontaneously in the studio. We were playing together. We had no idea what we would keep of it. We got out of the studio and we said, “It’s lame,” we listened to it the next day and said, “Ah, we’ll work on it again.” We’ve finished the first performance of the concept. I did it 15 days ago in Nice, in Nancy: where we set up two drums and did the thing live. I was really great. It was well received by the public. Patrick Thévenin Because you really thought about what you were going to do and try to keep the Cerrone feel… how do you avoid the trap that producers of your generation fall into, in trying to make it more youthful? In France, there are many… Cerrone Yes, yes. No one can accuse me of that. I have never changed direction. I would rather have disco be “outdated,” if we can say that, than change direction. No one can accuse me of this. But, on the other hand, you cannot be fooled by the evolution that is taking place. You cannot be fooled by that. Patrick Thévenin You mean technological advances? Cerrone Of course, the sound and tones, the artistic constructions, and cultural – not cultural… I mean the techniques that the DJs have brought. The public doesn’t even notice it, but the DJs changed all of the musical construction of songs in the 2000s. It’s not the same any more. You are forced to follow the movement or otherwise you just become tacky. Getting duped into trying to be young to follow the movement is stupid. There is no artist who can do that, because the public would rather have a young artist do it than an old artist trying to be young. On the other hand, you cannot put on blinkers and not hear what’s happening – especially when it’s good. So, I try, carefully, to do an amalgamation. I am not trying to stay young, but I’m not fooled by the evolution of what is happening at the production level. I don’t think that the musical evolution has been successful. It’s because of this that all the producers are going back to the origins, you can say, of this dance music style. But you cannot be fooled by the evolution of the production, because it’s the DJs that we call stars today. In my time, we would have called them the stars of engineering, because they have talents. They are not there by accident. David Guetta, for example, is no 1 in the United States. He is not there by accident. I have seen him on stage. We did something together this summer at an event with 30-50,000 people. He’s also a friend of 30 years… It’s really all right when I say, “Whoa, you have to have talent.” It doesn’t matter if there are 10 guys with him. There are some who will say, “But it’s not him who writes his music...” But what do we care? When it’s released, when the public buy their tickets, they will see a guy who is the artist and be happy when they goes home. Are they disappointed or not? Like I told you at the beginning of our interview, I had never made records on my own, ever. You have to be a mythomaniac to be able to say such nonsense. Talent is about knowing how to be surrounded by the right talents. Patrick Thévenin Who are the artists that interest you today? Cerrone Oh, there are quite a lot. I think that there are many. I have noticed that there has been a true artistic evolution in the past three or four years. There are so many. I don’t have any specific names to give you right now, but there are quite a lot. We are really in an era where… I did not really like the 2000s EDM sound. You don’t really know which person is doing what, and they all sing the same way. But since 2011, yes, there are some songs. I heard the new Adele album last week… There are really so many things. There are mountains of talents. Patrick Thévenin Will you work with them? Cerrone You are intrusive. I will only say when it’s done. Patrick Thévenin Alright. Have you made mistakes in your life? In your career? Cerrone Excuse me? Patrick Thévenin Have you made mistakes in your career? Cerrone Of course. Patrick Thévenin They would be… would that also be intrusive? Cerrone I do not want to talk about them, because we don’t rest on mistakes. We move on. But it would be pretentious to say that I didn’t make mistakes. Of course, I have. It’s inevitable. Mistakes help you to move forward, but you should not linger on them, either. Patrick Thévenin OK. We will finish soon. This will be your last question and then the public will ask you questions. Cerrone I would really appreciate it if someone brought me a full glass – is there anyone in this hall? Patrick Thévenin When the Daft Punk album was released…? Cerrone Do you agree with me? It’s similar to a white curtain. We can’t see anyone from here. We have extremely powerful lights ahead of us... Patrick Thévenin When Daft Punk released Random Access Memories they worked with many legendary musicians. Were you a little bit disappointed that you weren’t invited? Cerrone I would say no. Patrick Thévenin Like, “Giorgio was there, why not me?” Cerrone No, no. No, because, no. Wait. I am looking for an answer. I understand that because Nile Rodgers is one of the members of Chic, and Giorgio Moroder was the producer of Donna Summer. Me, I was always quite out in front. I think that’s one of the reasons. You see, [Daft Punk] did not put an artist out in front. Nile Rodgers, he’s a guitarist for Chic. Giorgio Moroder, it’s the first time that he’s out in front. I have been asked quite a lot of questions in the year-and-a-half or two years since it was released: “Giorgio Moroder, this and that, and what do you think of his comeback?” It’s not a comeback. I’ve met him quite often at the Grammy awards or on TV shows with Donna Summer, and she’s the one out in front. We did not talk about Giorgio Moroder. He was the producer in the background. Today is the era where we talk about producers. I am really glad for him – and in respect to his age on top of that, the poor fellow. Finally, he’s in the foreground. No, it’s not mean… besides, it’s someone who I respect a lot. I mean, when you are 75 years old and you are placed at the forefront, it’s quite amazing. It’s quite unexpected, I imagine. It’s a nice gift for him. Patrick Thévenin And what do you think of Daft Punk? A bit like you, they went to the United States, in way… Cerrone Ah well, it’s amazing. They really understood. Whether it’s artistically or in respect to sound, I would say that the first thing that touched me about Daft Punk, and that I really liked, was the sound. Even though they copied from everywhere, I don’t mind. They have earned it. They have appropriated from the time. It’s like a singer who sings a tune – we don’t really listen to the magnificent production, they just appropriate things with their talents. And if there is a talent that the Daft Punk have, it’s to appropriate things. We don’t care. I was sampled by them – in agreement – but I promise you that if he didn’t tell me about it I probably wouldn’t even have noticed, because they capture things and produce the texture of their sound. One more time – Daft Punk would not have been where they are today if they did not have the talent that they obviously have. Patrick Thévenin Is it true that you are one of the five most sampled artists in the world? Cerrone I will be pretentious and tell you that there aren’t five... Patrick Thévenin Two? And you do not sample at all? Cerrone It hasn’t happened yet, but maybe one day. No, I don’t really need it. I have a big index. I have a big bank account. For, Nile Rodgers, it happened through Chic… I can imagine that we have had 200 successful collaborations that were successful. That’s probably because, from generation to generation, I’ve been sampled and copied, because the nature of the sound prevented me from getting old or outdated – even if certain people would not consider it today. I’m not joking. This has kept me it kept me on the top. This has helped me surf over that. Patrick Thévenin Alright. Thank you, and now I will pass the microphone to whoever. Cerrone If I manage to see them. Audience Member Good evening. Cerrone Good evening. Audience Member The question that I would like to ask is that I have read Nile Rogers’ autobiography and in it he talks about “disco sucks.” It was an era which was quite violent towards disco in the United States… Cerrone That’s correct, yes. Audience Member … it seems that there were even bonfires in stadiums, where disco records were being burned. You’ve talked about Nile Rodgers and you talked about the period in which this happened, and I would really like to know your feelings about this event? Cerrone Thank you. That feels good. The “disco sucks” thing is what I explained. French, Italian, and other stars or from other countries were asked by record labels to record with disco orchestration – the violins, the brass, the steady beat – but these were songs that Americans did not accept it at all. In the United States there were artists like Barbra Streisand, for instance, who is also an artist whose career we can respect. When I heard the Bee Gees do a track with a disco title, it was on the radio but the aficionados who really liked and understood the atmosphere of disco – which is a bit different – were hammered by the media, because disco is a musical atmosphere. It’s not a tune, even if there is a melody. It’s not the same thing… And the Americans were aggressive. It happened in the ’80s. They called it “disco sucks” – that is, that disco is shit. I do agree with them a bit. Patrick Thévenin Another question? Audience Member Hello. Cerrone Hello. Audience Member You were DJing at big festivals this summer, and I would like to know how you feel about huge performances like that? Audience Member Ah. Good question. Two years ago, my label, Because ,told me, “You have to do to do a DJ set” and I said, “No, no. I am musician. I really like to perform live. I really like sweating. I really like to watch my bassist and to explore things that are not defined at the beginning.” But they insisted. They started to give me small suggestions that started to ring in my mind, saying , “But wait, you cannot play live like a DJ who plays other people’s hits. If you DJ, it’ll be another way of expressing yourself, you will only play your songs. You can remix them live.” That touched me a bit. It’s true. So, I’m my studio because I am forced to… wherever I live, whether in France or United States, I am always in the studio from 10am to 8pm. I have to play music. It’s my life. I bought a Pioneer Platinum and Ableton. I started to buy DJ equipment and tried to use it, and I realized that it wasn’t easy at all. But I started to build something and after a couple of months, I told Because that I would like to try it. In short, it has been two years. Today, I have the chance to… they proved to me that if I didn’t agree to do that, I would not have to chance to do huge festivals as I had the chance to this summer, like Glastonbury, which is one of the biggest festivals in the world, in England. I had the chance to play in front of 30,000, and I saw that they knew half the songs. I never really thought that I could perform live, and that there are huge festivals on other parts of the world where I could do that. I am really glad that he forced me to do that. To conclude, when you are musician and you perform in a public, whether it’s 5,000, 10,000, 100,000, or whatever, it’s really a game of seduction. It’s really a connection… to capture someone, seduce them and bring them to you. With DJing, it’s the same thing. I can tell you that if you play the wrong song, by the 12th minute or 17th or 22nd, and you feel that people are becoming less interested, you have to keep them under pressure. It’s really a job. At the end of a live concert, or at the end of a set that lasts one-and-a half or two hours, and I move to the front and say “Ciao” to them – well, they are really happy. The only difference that I see between doing a DJ set and a live set is the tiredness that I feel. When I perform live, I can tell you that I am broken into two, because I am getting older, whereas when I play a DJ set, I feel that I can continue. Otherwise, the exchange part with the public is the same. I have to say that because I have a huge catalog of music and I only play my music, people get into my universe or they don’t. But otherwise, it’s a good experience. I am really glad that I listened to their advice and that I was made to do it. Yes. Audience Member Good evening. Cerrone Good evening. Audience Member Is there a young French artist that you appreciate? By young, I mean an artist who has just launched, or has just recently launched? Cerrone Yes. Recently, there has been one: Christine & The Queens. Her concept, lyrics and sound are a revelation. I have never been fond of French chanson, but I see that France really has something serious. I know that she has started to tour in the United States, and the reception is phenomenal. Phenomenal. Audience Member Hello. Cerrone Hello. Audience Member I was wondering that, when you were spending time in New York, if you went out to clubs, what clubs you went to were and what they were like? Cerrone We are starting to plan a tour in the United States. The tour is going to come with the release of the new LP, so it’s going to be probably in the spring and summer. Well, we are going to bid you goodnight. Uh, is there another one? Audience Member I was curious. You are working now with Tony Allen, and a lot of your earlier music had a lot of African influences. What exposure did you had to African music when you started with the Kongas and these other groups? Cerrone I think that the African influence came with my band in the early ’70s, the Kongas. We were really impressed by African music because of percussion. When you are a drummer, of course, you have the door completely opened for African rhythm, because African rhythm is for moving the body. It’s to influence the body, to feel the body. So, if you feel that, of course, that informs your style and this is what happened for me with Kongas. Audience Member Good evening. When is your new album going to be released? Cerrone I can’t see the lady at the back but, mademoiselle, if everything goes as planned, I think that it’ll be released in March or April. I am impatient for the release. Like I said earlier, a track that I made with Tony Allen will be released in December. Oh, there is something else that I’m also going to release – oh, I am embarrassed, I am embarrassed – with another famous artist. Sorry. Manu Dibango! His manager came to me and asked what could we do together, and you were asking me earlier whether I had done a sample or not, but, yes, it’s true. I sampled the loop of “Soul Makossa” by Manu Dibango, who I have known for many years because we have crossed paths in concerts since the 70s. I said, “Oh yes, we will do something Afro.” I composed a song around this sample, and this is getting released with the Tony Allen. So, it’s what we called an EP. It’s four songs – all very Afro. It’s the most Afro song and the least commercial on the album, with a remix by Todd Edwards. I have the good fortune to have a lot of people putting their hands on my work. It will be released on the same EP. Audience Member Mr. Cerrone? I have a follow up question. Cerrone Where are you? Audience Member Right here… a follow-up question regarding your recent collaborators. It feels that, throughout the ’70s and until now, the act of producing music kind of switched from being a very communal affair to something done more by one or two individuals. You seem to still work with a lot of people and enjoy that process. Is that still something important to you? Cerrone I am not sure I understand your question… OK. OK, fine. I am always working as a band, with the people around of me, because it’s not the same when you work in front of your computer. You can say that, at the end of the day, “Oh, it’s so good. I am so good. I am so well,” and that is not the way I work. I must have a feeling with my musicians. This is why I like to perform and record live: with the real bass players, with real guitars, and to have the influence of the engineer. I’m not the guy who records, pushes the red button, and that’s it. He has to give me something, otherwise, I change the engineer. I mean, my spirit is with the band. I am not a conductor. Audience Member Good evening, Sir. Cerrone Good evening. Audience Member You have built the universe of your sound around drums because you are a drummer, and today drums have disappeared a little bit from pop and dance music… Cerrone Excuse me? Audience Member I meant, in favor of drum machines and computers, on top of acoustic instruments. What are your thoughts on this? Is it something that saddens you a bit? Cerrone I think that I am on the other side of your understanding. I think that drummers have never been in the forefront before; they have never been stars. Now, there is no music style where drums are not at the forefront, whether they are played by a real drummer, or played by a drum machine. At a certain moment, there was someone who played it even if it’s an instrument, of course, but you cannot say that drums are not valued today. They have never been more valued than today. I think that, without any pretensions on my part, whether it’s drum manufacturers, the whole world, original drummers like Tony Allen, or other drummers, I do not consider myself as having been a great technical drummer – but having placed drums in the forefront I think that I have a minimum responsibility. I really think that the drum has never been much in the forefront before. We had never really felt before in the musical universe that we can hear everywhere, the rhythm. It’s the drum. Whether it’s played in real life or played by a drum machine… you know how a drum machine is made? Behind it, there is a drummer who recorded it. So, instead of playing it live, you push a button and you hear what the drummer had played. So, it’s still the drum. Audience Member Thank you very much. Cerrone If that pleases you. Audience Member Good evening again. Cerrone You have the right to one more question. You’ve already asked one. Audience Member Since you talked about collaboration at the beginning of the night, I would like to know who your drummer idol is, and I would like to know… Cerrone Tony Allen. Audience Member Bravo. Afrobeat is a really good reference. Cerrone Voilà. Otherwise, I would have done it with someone else. Audience Member Alright. And if you had the opportunity to set up a supergroup today with any musicians, dead or alive, you would choose? Cerrone Ah. No. No. I am not excited… I do not have. No, wait, why do you want me… I still have the chance to have a career that still works, with an album that will be released. I just did a tour, which was fine. Why do you want me to bother myself with setting up with a new group, and restart from square one? If I want to play with a great musician for my record – for instance a great drummer – well, I will call Tony Allen. If I find that there’s a bassist that’s driving me crazy – like when I hear Beyoncé and I listen back to the concert DVDs – I say, “Oh, the bassist, he is so good,” and I call the bassist and he comes and plays on my album. But to then go on a crusade and set up a new group, no, wait… If I have a bad career one day or I am in retirement, perhaps. But I don’t see the appeal, to be honest. I would invite them to come and collaborate on my album, or for a live performance. It happens quite a lot, that. It’s not enough to hold concerts with Nile Rodgers, because he invites me to the Montreux jazz festival. I do it. It happens quite a lot. Yes, I work with a mixture of artistic people that I respect. But to restart a group, no, it’s not worth my time anymore. Audience Member Good evening. I am here. I wanted to ask you, in the ’70s and ’80s, when you have the opportunity to be in the United States, in New York, which clubs did you visit and what were your experience of them? Cerrone It was amazing. I can’t tell you. It was quite cheeky. I remember… I don’t know if you were born then. I don’t think so. In ’75, the pill arrived. You have no idea what this triggered. This triggered an excess. At the same time, there was the rediscovery of – even though it never really disappeared – cocaine. Then came an era which was very provocative. That’s why artists like me, Gaultier, or Goude got out, because this was a very, very provocative era – meaning that you had to be daring. So, in a new club – closed, where no one could come in, not even Nile Rodgers – it was forbidden. That’s how he created the song, “Le Freak.” He was forbidden because you needed to be one of a select few to enter these areas. They were not very big. They were smaller than Le Palace in Paris, for instance. So, no – I really can’t tell you. On top of that, I have my wife in the hall. I would feel embarrassed. Patrick Thévenin OK, ladies and gentlemen. Maybe one last question, and then we will let Marc go. Everything is good? Perfect. Cerrone Which does not mean that it was a swingers’ club – do not exaggerate that. We still bid you goodnight.

---

Title: Alexander Hacke and Gareth Jones
Date: 2017-06-19
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/alexander-hacke-and-gareth-jones-lecture/

Alexander Hacke and Gareth Jones
If there’s a sound you associate with the 1980s Berlin underground, then there’s a good chance Gareth Jones and Alexander Hacke had a hand in it. Hacke joined the toweringly influential Einstürzende Neubauten shortly after the band’s formation in 1980. He was only 15 years old and already a member of cult favorites such as Sentimentale Jugend and Mona Mur & die Mieter. Jones for his part worked as producer and mixing engineer at the iconic Hansa Tonstudio, adding an industrial edge to recordings by Depeche Mode, Tuxedomoon and Fad Gadget. Their paths crossed when Jones contributed production to the Neubauten albums Halber Mensch and Fünf auf der nach oben offenen Richterskala.
In this lecture as part of the Red Bull Music Academy Bass Camp Berlin 2017, Jones and Hacke discussed their tenacious work with Einstürzende Neubauten, Berlin in the ’80s and what it means to create a signature sound.
Hosted by Hanna Bächer Please welcome Alexander Hacke and Gareth Jones. Gareth Jones Hello. Alexander Hacke Hello. Hanna Bächer This here has actually been the very first time, this song has been the occasion for the very first time that you were in this room. Is that right? Alexander Hacke Yeah and the first time that... At least as far as I remember, the first time that we met was in this room. Gareth Jones Yeah that’s as far as I remember as well now. It’s become the official story. That’s the story, right? We met in this room. We think we really did. It’s quite funny because obviously the occasion of us meeting was when I was working with Frank Tovey, now dead of course, rest in peace Frank, and this song called “Collapsing New People” was inspired by Berlin and Eintürzende Neubauten. We invited them to come and play on the middle eight. We think now that they’ve been cut out of the radio edit. Alexander Hacke It’s the so-called radio edit. Gareth Jones Because obviously that’s the video. That’s the short version. Anyway. We were hoping to hear the Neubauten bit, but it’s not there, not on the video. Anyway... Hanna Bächer The artist is called Fad Gadget. We should probably mention him with his artist name as well. You had been working with him in London already, right? Gareth Jones I don’t know. I think we did the whole album here. The album was called Gag and the cover of the album is Fad wearing that feather suit. It’s an Anton Corbijn photo, actually. That’s the first I met Anton Corbijn as well. That was a wonderful experience. It was wonderful meeting you guys and having you come in and set up and play on the middle eight. I guess that was the start of a... I think I might have already met Blixa [Bargeld of Einstürzende Neubauten], because I think he came to visit Daniel on a Depeche Mode session. Then I had the very great pleasure of making some records with... Alexander Hacke I think also the Birthday Party were recording in Hansa while you were mixing Depeche Mode upstairs or something like that. Gareth Jones The Birthday Party, I don’t think I was mixing Depeche, but I was mixing something else upstairs. I was mixing something else upstairs and Daniel was here with the Birthday Party for sure. I said, “Look man, come and look at this studio.” Anyways, a lot of history and it’s a long time ago. It’s a very important space for me personally. Alexander Hacke Yes we spent the formative years of our youth in this room. Gareth Jones Yeah we did. Yeah we did. Hanna Bächer You grew up in Neukölln right? Or, you were born in Neukölln? Alexander Hacke Yeah. Hanna Bächer Which was part of West Berlin for anyone who might not know. I did not know it to be honest, until very recently. Were you aware of Hansa Studios existing as a teenager or was that a totally different world that you thought you could never enter? Alexander Hacke Yes, I was aware of it. I had an older cousin, she’s like four years older and she would listen to those David Bowie records. Also, she would scare the hell out of me with Roxy Music. As a little kid, I was afraid of Bryan Ferry’s voice. Hanna Bächer How is that possible? Alexander Hacke I couldn’t stand the vibrato. It would give me the creeps. “Mommy, Katherine’s playing that music again!” Hanna Bächer I think it’s a really funny story that someone who would continue to make music that is as scary as Einstürzende Neubauten would be scared of Roxy Music. Fair enough. Gareth Jones I don’t know if Neubauten is frightening music. I thought of it as having dark edges and melancholy, but I never thought of it... I don’t know. It’s not for me to say what the group was trying to do. I never had the impression the group... It was trying to shock people, but not frighten them necessarily. Alexander Hacke Let’s say it’s passionate music and that can be frightening. Hanna Bächer Is there such a thing as a frightening record to you, then, Gareth? Gareth Jones I’m not frightened by music, no. Music doesn’t frighten me. Hanna Bächer That’s a very good thing because it has been your job for many years now. To go back to that, in the late ’70s you started working in a few studios in London. When did you first become aware of Hansa Studios or when did you first get invited to move to Berlin and to work here? Gareth Jones I wasn’t invited to move to Berlin. I kind of pushed my way in. I worked with another Neue Deutsche Welle band in the early ’80s or something. The manager was a guy called Connie and he said to me... I was a very nervous young guy and I wanted to go back to London to mix the record that I’d recorded with this band, because I just wanted to mix it somewhere I felt safe and confident. Then Connie said, “That’s fine. But let me show you the Hansa mix room.” I was very young and impressionable and it was awesome. I said, “OK, well if I have to I’ll go and look at the Hansa mix room, all right, Connie.” I kind of walked in the door and I was like, “Whoa, this is amazing.” The same with this room, more importantly actually. First of all I worked in a high-tech mix room upstairs, but then of course very quickly I discovered they had this incredible room. Just to say to everyone here – I can’t see everyone, let me have a look – oh yeah, there’s quite a lot of people here, that’s nice. Thank you for coming everyone. When we used to make music in this room, it was pretty scummy, right? Now it’s like quite... Alexander Hacke They cleaned it up nicely, but basically the important parts like the wooden floor and the paneled ceiling and all that, that was already there... Gareth Jones This stage was already here pretty much, wasn’t it? Alexander Hacke Absolutely. Gareth Jones I think the stage was a bit more echo-y. I think they firmed it up. I remember the stage being a bit bouncy. Alexander Hacke Yeah, probably there’s more risers. Hanna Bächer Was this Neue Deutsche Welle band that you first mixed, was that Ideal? Gareth Jones Ideal, yeah. Hanna Bächer Was that somehow in the similar scene as the things that you were doing back then, or was that a completely different world? Alexander Hacke Well, we all knew each other. We would all frequent the same nightclubs, like the Jungle and stuff. The Jungle is mentioned in “Ich stehe auf Berlin,” you know. We knew each other and you know, we would make fun of Ideal basically, but Eff Jott Krüger [Ideal's guitarist] who also passed away... Gareth Jones Sadly. Alexander Hacke Sadly, many years ago. We became good friends too, but in the beginning it was just, you know, like this chauvinist thing. “You pop tarts,” you know. Gareth Jones Yeah. That’s what it felt like to me, like a different scene for sure. Berlin was very small-scene then, wasn’t it? Of course you guys knew each other. It was unthinkable that I would meet Blixa Bargeld through Depeche Mode, but I did because of Daniel Miller, really. Hanna Bächer Could you even have imagined to not meet those people? Did it feel as that size of a city where you felt like you could maybe not find an entrance in a certain scene? Or was it really just those few bars where you went and if you went often enough on a Thursday then... Alexander Hacke I think it was inevitable if you were moving about a certain scene. If you were having certain interests then you would meet other main people because it was just this little village, this little island, basically. Then of course, if you weren’t interested in this kind of music or in music in general, of course you could go completely different ways. In Berlin, you didn’t have the army, for example. There was no draft to the army. All of my classmates that wanted to play with guns, they joined the police force. Of course, they never met the people that I met. Gareth Jones Except in a different way. Alexander Hacke Except in a very different situation, yeah. Hanna Bächer That’s very interesting of you saying that, because I always hear the stories of people who did not want to be in the army and then moved from West Germany to Berlin because then you didn’t have to be in the army, and never considered that obviously there were people in Berlin who really wanted to be in the army. Alexander Hacke Yeah, you know, basically wanted to be tough and play with guns. Yeah, they would join the cops. Hanna Bächer Back to when this video, or maybe not this video, but the song for the video was recorded, which I think was late ’83, probably, you had been with Neubauten, kind of following them for like three years, but not all the time as an official band member. Is that right? Alexander Hacke When I first started playing with them in 1980, I was 14 years old. At one point it was decided back then that I should learn about other things of life. They basically put me on vacation, or “ich war beurlaubt” [German euphemism for getting temporarily laid of]. I know what you’re going to play now... Yeah, but I played with them in the very beginning and then I didn’t play with them for a while, for a short while. Then I came back as an engineer basically. I decided, influenced by the whole industrial music scene out of England, I decided that I rather wanted to manipulate people than to be like a showgirl for them. And so I decided I wanted to be at the mixing desk instead. So I would do the live sound for Neubauten and very selective engineering. If somebody played something I didn’t like I would play a cassette instead, and then at one point I got bored onstage and I made my way back up on stage. Hanna Bächer So basically you were so bad as a live sound engineer that they just had to make you part of the band. Alexander Hacke Yeah, it was... Gareth made his way into Berlin. I made my way back into the band and I was just like... Gareth Jones That’s interesting to hear that actually because I remember you. Now you’ve flagged it up as being very interested in the recording process. Alexander Hacke Yeah. Gareth Jones And that’s why. I knew that history but I’d forgotten about it, so thanks for sharing that, because now I’m going back there and I’m remembering just how involved and interested you were in the recording process. In a way, for instance, that Andrew [Chudy AKA N.U. Unruh] wasn’t particularly. Alexander Hacke No. Gareth Jones Andrew was very interested in building instruments [rather] than hitting them. But he wasn’t that interested in the recording process I don’t think. Alexander Hacke No. Gareth Jones So, you know. And you obviously were. Alexander Hacke Yeah. Hanna Bächer I want to play a video that is from your very, very early days, but before that, could you say about the other band members, how interested was everyone in technology? Because I think it’s quite interesting in regards to what they actually played. Gareth Jones How interested were... What, the Neubauten members and technology? Hanna Bächer Yes. Gareth Jones Well, I don’t know. It was a different set-up then. I remember Alex being interested in the recording technology for sure. Mark [Chung] wasn’t interested at all. Mark very much had like a management role in the band and a super important bass player. Hanna Bächer And still kind of has. Gareth Jones Obviously. Alexander Hacke And the sportsman. You wanted to have Mark on your team if you played table football or something like that. Gareth Jones OK. Obviously lead vocalists being what they are, the lead vocal had to sound right for sure. I mean, I love Blix’s poetry anyway, so for me that was a joy. So he was kind of interested in the whole vibe, because of course that’s supporting the lyric. Mufti was also, I remember him as being pretty interested in... Alexander Hacke Very, very interested. Yeah yeah. With Mufti, with F.M. Einheit, I experienced for the first time music without a rotating medium. With Mufti, with you we experienced for the first time that DAT tapes, and also the, what was it? The format before that, on beta cassettes? These PCM tapes or something. That was the first digital recordings. But with Mufti I remember, he was the first person to actually play me his new music coming from a hard drive, so you would walk into a room and there was no rotation whatsoever. Nothing was rotating. Not a tape, not even a small cassette... Gareth Jones The hard drive was spinning, but you couldn’t see it. Alexander Hacke You couldn’t see it, and suddenly there was music. And also with digital technology you wouldn’t hear the hiss, the mandatory hiss that [with] everything else you would. Everything would announce itself. You know it’s like, “Oh, watch out, there’ll be music in a minute,” and then digital music would just come. “What the hell’s going on?” And so Mufti was always into technology. Gareth Jones I agree with that. That’s very much my memory of Mr. Einheit as well. Because when we made a track called, a 12" called Yü-Gung, I had an analog sound player that was made in Berlin called Mr. Lab. Do you remember Mr. Lab? Had little buttons on it. And I had a very powerful, but very simple early digital sampler that we were triggering from the Mr. Lab, and Mufti was on it immediately. And I didn’t know if he would be because I knew him before that as a very muscular beat-maker. A physical player. That’s how I knew him before that. Hitting drums, playing beats very powerfully, and so I was a bit nervous bringing the sampler and the sequencer. But he was on it straight away because his mind moved to another level. A deep musical level. He got it. I mean, I think the whole band got it, but I was nervous. I thought, “Well, I’m going to share this. Maybe they’ll hate it,” but he was great. It was awesome to see, because basically I thought he was a bit like a caveman or something. And then he turned out to be this total programming nerd as well. Hanna Bächer You should meet some programming nerds, they can be cavemen. Gareth Jones Yeah, absolutely. Many of us are. Hanna Bächer It’s not really a contradiction. Gareth Jones No, exactly. But there are some live percussion players who don’t like sequencing. I know many great– Alexander Hacke Or click tracks for that matter. Gareth Jones Yeah, for instance. There are many, many, many great percussionists who were not interested in sequencing at all. Why would they be? Because they can play anything. But he was very interested immediately. Hanna Bächer That’s a different thing though, because that’s time based, and I think Mufti is interested in sounds, so he liked the sampler as he liked unusual instruments. Alexander Hacke Well we were, also that the idea, it came up... It’s a completely different philosophical concept as to play music with instruments. If you play samples you are playing events. Actually, events in time. You see what I mean? Like, before that with a synthesizer you would try to imitate the sound of breaking glass. With sampling you could just break the glass and then sequence that actual event. And that was a completely new thing. You would have this God-like delusions of grandeur because you could rearrange events in time more than just playing music. Gareth Jones Yeah, no I completely agree. And also we were... In all the work we did together and all the work I did with samplers it was very much about capturing real events from the real world. I, personally, was never interested in playing an oboe in a sampler or a violin or something. It’s quite big money now. It’s quite Spitfire [Audio], and there’s loads of big samplers. It’s a big thing now to have a bass, Scarbee and Spitfire and loads of real pianos. And that’s all kind of whatever. It is what it is. I think it’s... I’m not interested, personally. I was always super excited by the idea of taking a sound from the real world. Alexander Hacke And also it would give you new possibilities in terms of size. See? We would work with these, we had these tables that would tell us the exact tape speeds for different keys, right? You knew how to slow down a tape in order to transpose the music to a different key. And with sampling you could do the thing where, like a tiny instrument. Like a tiny glass, if you play it back at a slower speed it would become larger, and the other way around. So you could make giant things tiny, or tiny things, turn them into giant objects. Gareth Jones It’s magic, isn’t it? Everyone’s got a recording studio now because everyone’s got a laptop. But one of the magic things about recording sound for me is that you can make the quietest real sound the loudest sound on the track if you want to. You don’t have to. But if you want to. I’ve done that. And that’s amazing. So you can record a really loud sound, and it’s really quiet in the mix. And then you can have a really quiet sound and make it really loud. Alexander Hacke But Gareth, and you’ll never get to play that video if we go on like this. Hanna Bächer That’s all right, this is actually really interesting and I love how enthusiastic you are about the fact that you can do those things because you’ve sat behind mixing desks for like four decades and you still think it’s a miracle. Gareth Jones I’m a bit slow. Alexander Hacke Also what Gareth used to do is, particularly in this room, what you could do in this room very nicely is, we would sit in the middle of this room on the floor and record very tiny sounds, but Gareth would put microphones through really heavy compression in our headphones. So we would sit in here with the headphones on and record tiny, tiniest dropping the tiniest objects on the floor and stuff like that. And we had to move very carefully because the headphones were so compressed and so loud that if we went like this [stomps foot] we would have blown our ears out. Gareth Jones I had that experience the first time I went to the far east in the ’80s with a recording Walkman. And this is really obvious, right? But I put the headphones on, and then turned up the volume of the microphone, and then it was exactly... Not exactly. It was pretty much like the real world, only louder. It was great! It was just really great! “Listen, it’s like the real world.” It blew my little mind. Hanna Bächer I’m going to play a bit of this video, because it blew my mind. Alexander Hacke OK. Hanna Bächer And then we’re going to continue with those stories. (video: Sentimentale Jugend Live) Alexander Hacke Wow, that... Hanna Bächer You were 16! Alexander Hacke I was 16, yes. That’s me at the Tempodrom, which was actually right over there on Potsdamer Platz. [applause] Thank you. That was from the Grosse Untergangsshow, Das Festival Genialer Dilettanten at the Tempodrom, which that festival spurred kind of a fake musical movement called Genialer Dilettanten where it was also imperative to misspell the word “dilettanten.” And that was Christiane F. playing guitar there with me and... Hanna Bächer Who was your partner? Alexander Hacke Yeah. Hanna Bächer You didn’t say partner when you were 16, you said girlfriend. Alexander Hacke No, she was my first girlfriend. Yeah. Gareth Jones That is a bit scary, I must say. I was a little bit frightened. I was boasting before, but I was a little bit frightened seeing that. Alexander Hacke Yeah. And I was 16 and I was wearing her leather jacket. That tells you how skinny I was. Hanna Bächer 1981, fourth of September. 1981, we even have the exact date here. I wanted to play that because I think Neubauten to me has always been a band that you’ll want to see live. Did you see Neubauten live before you worked with them? Gareth Jones Probably not. I might have done, I can’t remember. The thing is, I didn’t go out much. I was very obsessed with being in the recording studio. In fact for me, a lot of... Most of my musical experience has been listening to records and later CDs and whatever, streams and shit. So I’m a kind of headphones guy, or sitting at home with the speakers. That’s kind of how I’ve experienced music in my life. And it was hearing music on speakers that made me want to get into recording studios and help record records. Because I was obsessed by it and I thought it was just incredible. So, in other words, I never came to recording trying to capture some kind of live... It wasn’t that I thought, “Oh, these bands are great live! I must get them in the stu...” I kinda saw the studio as a whole separate thing, you know. I never cared how difficult it would be to make the recording work on the stage. That was never my problem. And I was never that interested in it. But I mean, having said that, I saw Neubauten... I have seen the band many times live and I just saw them recently in London, at the Forum, and it was an incredible, incredible gig. So if anyone’s not seen the new... I don’t know if it’s out ... Is Berlin hemmed already? Alexander Hacke We’re looking into Berlin for the fall, so we might. Gareth Jones Yeah, yeah. It’s a long time since I seen the band live, and it was a great show. So I do love live music, but it was just for the... And also when I was young, what I’m trying to say is I was learning how to make recordings, and a lot of that seemed to be staying in the studio all the time, all hours, and just working all the time in the studio. So, stupidly, some bands, I would never work with a band now without meeting them and going to the rehearsal room and hopefully going live and even getting to know them. But sometimes, back in those days, I would kinda meet the band in the studio, on the first day of the recording session, you know. So, different life, different times. Alexander Hacke I can relate to that. Also for me, there’s the one aspect of, you know, like the performance, and the excitement of seeing bands live, but also what I was really interested in, was really magic for me, and still is really magic, is when you have a pair of really nicely aligned stereo speakers, and you sit in the sweet spot between two speakers, like you do in a studio between your near-field monitors. You actually don’t hear the music coming out of the speaker. You cannot point at the direction anymore, it kind of materializes, like right in front of you in this space between the speakers. And that for me, that still is about listening to music on stereophonic equipment that still is the most amazing thing. You know that suddenly you hear this wonderful sound in the middle of the room. Even though you have those two speakers there, it’s like right there in front of you. Gareth Jones And that’s an experience that’s very repeatable now when we’re working. If you turn the computer screen off, because we have the privilege of having the magic of that experience in pre-digital technology. The music’s on tape. So you’re not looking at a screen, so if you want to have a really amazing listening experience, you might turn the lights down and press the tape machine and I can only get that now, in my little workroom. I’ve got like a button on the side of the screen. Alexander Hacke Yeah. Gareth Jones And I turn the screen off. And then I can kinda see it. Because when my eyes are focused on the screen, it’s harder to have that magic experience. Alexander Hacke Absolutely. Yeah, you listen differently when you look at a computer screen. That’s definitely true. And also, still when we work with Neubauten, we insist on being these five mooks in a room who do not look at computer screens. You know, so we do have the engineer that takes care of editing and stuff like that later on. We assign him to, you know, like tasks, chores, that he needs to do. But while we play music together, we don’t look at computer screens. Gareth Jones Right on. Hanna Bächer But you talked about this hard drive earlier, right? When you first started working together, there was no computers involved. Alexander Hacke No. Hanna Bächer Like, the hard drive that was much later... Alexander Hacke Yeah, the hard drive was much later. I was just telling that story to illustrate how technology-savvy Mufti was. No, no, when we were working here, it was all 24-track tape machines, which also were amazing. We kind of worked our way up from four-track to eight-track to 16-track, and then here you had two 24-track machines synced to each other, which was amazing. Earlier, we were talking about that there’s a loop actually going on in “Collapsing New People,” which is like a printing machine that Gareth recorded somewhere in Berlin. And in order to do that, he made a loop of it. And a loop back in the days meant an actual, physical tape loop and I was talking about this for another thing, about the Hansa Studio recently. And we would have these tape loops going across from... The control room was over there, where the bar is right now, and we would have these tape loops, you know, like supported by microphone stands going all the way through the whole length of the hallway, you know, in order to get like really long tape loops of things. Gareth Jones Yeah. Because we’re a bit crazy. Alexander Hacke We would do things with Neubauten, we would cut little holes with, a what do you call ’em? Like a hole puncher? We would cut little holes in it while it was going by, or burning it, burning the tape while it was going by, and stuff like that. Gareth Jones Tape loops. It’s a thing, isn’t it? It’s like with, you know, with analog technology, like that, anyone’s who’s got guitar pedals or anything, you know, with analog technology and wires and amps and tape loops, it’s much easier to make a creative mistake, or to make a new discovery that you weren’t planning on making. I find it quite difficult with a computer to make a mistake. I mean, obviously I can open the software synth that has a sound that I wasn’t expecting. But the kind of creative mistakes that you can make with analog technology are really awesome. Alexander Hacke Mistakes on a computer are dreadful. It just means that you have to reboot and that the show kind of stops at that moment, it’s like, “Oh, what’s going on?” You get these [grinding noise] glitches. Gareth Jones Mistakes with analog can be hugely creative. Alexander Hacke Wonderful. And the whole thing about analog is also that it’s an actual physical thing. There is this convention here once a year called the Superbooth where all these guys meet that work with the Eurorack with us. There’s a whole community of people that build little synthesizer modules in a certain format and it’s great because these guys, aside from the fact that it’s just like, you know, like nerds meeting for their miniature model trains, just, “Oh, I need to get a new steam engine!” But the thing about that fascination and about analog, working with actual tape and stuff is that it’s an actual physical process. It’s not like moving this glass from here to here means a certain combinations of zeros and ones. But I actually moved the glass. Gareth Jones You actually moved the fucking glass. Alexander Hacke You actually moved the glass. Gareth Jones I know. And on the computer, it’s all imaginary. I mean, you hear melodies and shit, I’m not knocking it. I get it. I get it. We all use computers. It’s awesome fun, but it is actually not real. And every once in a while you have to say to yourself, “It’s just a fantasy behind a glass screen what I’m doing” Which is different. I just want to follow up what you were talking about, because I borrowed a little modular for those who are coming to the bass camp. I borrowed a little modular from Schneider’s, from my friend Andreas Schneider. Alexander Hacke Which is the church of modular geekism. Gareth Jones And very important in my life, as well, this guy. But that might be another story. But I borrowed the modular and I have, so I’ve got, all the devices in this module that I borrowed I have in London, OK? So I know it pretty well. So I’m sitting in the back room, in a little studio down there, and I’m plugging it up to make a noise before you guys arrive for the Bass Camp. Because I thought, “I want to have a bit of a noise on it,” just for a vibe you know? And then it starts making this incredible noise, and I’m thinking, “They must have changed this module, because I have this module and I’ve never heard it sound like this!” And then I look at it, and I’ve plugged something in wrong. But it sounds incredible, and I had exactly that kind of discovery just this afternoon. And I thought, “Oh! That’s interesting. If I plug that in there, it does that.” Alexander Hacke And that’s the whole magic about places like this, and working with analog technology and stuff. I find, in my opinion, it’s the ritualistic aspect of that, because of that, because you are making a conscious decision to do something, physically. To do something, rather than having the assumption of an actual event, which it is in the digital world. Basically the digital world is just the bus map, or the schedule. The digital world is the bus schedule. But the analog world is to take the actual bus and go from A to B. Hanna Bächer M41. Gareth Jones That works for me, because I’m very interested in process, and part of what we did together, in this room, when I had the great pleasure of working with Alex and the band, was to embark upon a process, where we didn’t really know how it was. We knew we might, you know, Mr. Bargeld might have had the lyrics. Mr. Einheit might have had a beat. Mr. Hacke might have had a guitar riff or an idea. But more importantly, almost, was we all committed to a process. Which was to come in here, build some shit and see what happened and choose the good bits. That’s so important, I think. I’m not the kind of person who, I can’t imagine what a record’s going to sound like, but I do like going on a process. And saying, “Well look, if we all get together in a room, with some amps and some guitars and some musicians and a tape recorder, a recorder, we’ll probably make something awesome.” And we did. Alexander Hacke And also, in the physical world, you have to make the conscious decision of when to not play, much more than in the digital realm, you know? Hanna Bächer Let me tell you, maybe, what I find the hardest to imagine, when talking about recording on tape. It’s that when you delete a thing, or you destroy a thing by burning the tape, it’s gone. Today you have a back-up, and you have a back-up of your back-up, and then maybe you have a cloud, or whatever. Or maybe you don’t have all of these things, but then you’re a bit stupid, probably. But then you have 24 tracks, or 48 tracks, maybe, and then when they were full and you wanted to do a thing again, it meant getting rid of the thing that was on the tape before. And then, it’s gone. Alexander Hacke Yeah, that’s, in Algeria, I think it is, where the whole music industry worked on cassette tapes. The recording studios where they worked at, those Algerian Cheb, Mami and all these different Algerian musicians, they only possessed one single 24 reel, and the entire music of the country for 20 years was recorded... Gareth Jones One reel at a time... Alexander Hacke ...on one reel of tape. You know, it was just like, recorded over and over. Gareth Jones That’s the model now. If you’re lucky enough to work on tape now, you find an old bit of tape that’s been used before, because it’s so expensive, you know? Alexander Hacke Yeah. Hanna Bächer But I mean like more in the actual writing process, the process you talked about earlier. You had to like, as a band, you know, one maybe liked the guitar sound, and guitarist didn’t, or the other way around. And you were saying it’s great, and then you have to come to a decision of re-doing it, or not. You couldn’t keep every copy. Alexander Hacke Yes. Gareth Jones That’s the bonus. That’s what’s good about it. I mean that’s what makes it so powerful. We’ve all been there with a full reel of tape, and someone, let’s say the guitar solo, you know, and then the guitar solo player says, “I can do better than that.” And then everyone looks a bit nervous, because they know exactly what that means, and then you have to step up and do better. That’s incredible. Alexander Hacke Or if you would drop in, you know, “I think that was a really good tape – take – except the first two bars. I fucked those up, I wanna re-do the first two bars,” and then you would have the hotshot engineer who just goes like, “pop-pop,” and just get that spot. That was sportsmanship, you know? Gareth Jones Exactly, it was exciting. It was sportsmanship, yeah. Alexander Hacke And also... Gareth Jones A lot of trust Alexander Hacke Oh yeah! Gareth Jones Because the engineer has to trust the guitarist, and the guitarist has to trust the engineer. It’s team building. Alexander Hacke And you could have real life-changing, traumatizing, catastrophes. At one point we had an entire string ensemble, was in a studio in Belgium, we had an entire string ensemble coming in, and working the whole day with them, on a certain piece. And then the engineer or tape operator at the time, he was just clearing the slave tapes. If you work with two reel-to-reel tape machines, one would be the master and one would be the slave. He was just doing some rearranging, clearing, but basically what happened, he thought the slave was the master, or the other way around, and he erased the entire string session, with these musicians that came in from Brussels into the sticks. And I have never seen the man in such distress before. After he just stood in the doorway, and he was like completely pale, and just like, “I have to tell you guys something.” And I felt so sorry for him, and this is something that only can happen with tape. We had to get the entire gang of musicians back in and reschedule the whole thing, and basically he worked the whole session for free then. Hanna Bächer I mean, that’s probably a situation that you would not want to recreate, but you’re saying it had some advantages to be able to actually delete things, in terms of decision-making. So, when working with people now, how do you − I mean both of you, in each of your positions − how do you get to that point of decision-making, if you can keep, like, 80 million versions of everything? Gareth Jones You can’t. Alexander Hacke It is very hard. I mean, you can humiliate your client into the position that it is very important what they are doing at that given time. But it won’t make you very popular as a producer. But you can, I think, you know what I’m talking about. Gareth Jones I do. And we still get great performances and you, I mean I loved your last record with Danielle [de Picciotto], and it’s full of great performances. And it’s still possible to get great performances. But you cannot do the same thing, because it’s the difference between walking across the Grand Canyon on the high wire, without a safety rope, and walking with a safety rope. Both journeys are mind-blowingly incredible, you know. And we’ve seen Red Bull do videos of extreme sports. Some are protected, some are not. The achievement is the same, if you can walk across the Grand Canyon with a safety rope, and you don’t need it on a high wire, that’s an amazing achievement. But it’s different from walking across without a safety rope. It’s just a different thing. Alexander Hacke Even though I think it is possible, and it also is a possible goal in the creation of art, to put that same urgency, or to put that same danger in your given performance, you could. But it’s a different mindset. If you just go like, “I’m gonna play along, I’m gonna jam on this for a while.” Basically, that’s the whole thing, that also changed since digital. You know back then there was jamming, and we knew it was jamming, because nobody could afford to record that whole crap. Now you can record, you know, like... Gareth Jones Every little thought. Alexander Hacke Yeah, like the most ridiculous jams, and I hate that word already. And somebody will have to listen to that crap and there’ll be hours and hours and hours of it. Basically I think it actually is necessary to put yourself in that mind state to a certain degree where everything you do or say or sing or play is precious at that moment. Gareth Jones Your energy is precious and your time’s precious and you get that, and I get it, and we’ve both worked on that level where you invite a musician to play something on a track or they want, and they don’t play it 100 times. They maybe play it once and you go, “Oh, thank you Alex, thank you for coming in and playing,” whatever he played, “Thank you, that’s great,” or, “Thanks for playing that organ,” and it’s amazing. Then there’s many great artists who do that because, like Alex, they’ve learned that basically, if they’re in the right state of mind and they’ve done their morning meditation and they’re at peace with the world, they play – or not – they play their solo or their piece in one take. And if they do another 25 takes, it’s not going to be any better. You short-circuit the whole thing. You play it once, and everyone goes, “Awesome!” What a huge time-saver that is already, right there you’ve saved like three days of listening to “jams.” Alexander Hacke Yeah, or there were people like that, like the late, great Chrislo Haas who was the analog synthesizer player for Deutsch Amerikanische Freundschaft and Liaisons Dangereuses, this wonderful music. He had a sense of this immediacy, this magic thing. Which basically meant if he would play his synthesizers and you told him, “Oh Chrislo, that’s great,” he said, “Yeah, really? boop.” Gone. Erased. You know he would just take all the cables, as soon as you told him. Whenever I worked with him in his later years, I had to record him secretly, because I knew if he knew that I was recording him, he would just do, deliberately do crap because he wanted to keep exactly that kind of… Gareth Jones That special live moment. Alexander Hacke That danger, that danger to it, that unpredictability. Gareth Jones Unpredictability, yeah, yeah. Alexander Hacke Yes? All right. Hanna Bächer I think we should listen to another track that was done I think many years before either of you started doing morning meditation. It’s not going to have a video, you can leave that off if you want to. Should we go for [Einstürzende Neubauten song] “Seele Brennt” because you’re saying we can... Alexander Hacke Absolutely. Let me explain first, “Seele Brennt” was recorded in this room and we recorded it like a theater play and also like a painting. Basically, everything we did, the whole song was recorded in one take without any overdubs. It’s recorded in this room as the room is. That’s the theater play part, and the painting part is that all the microphones were placed in a way that, like Blixa singing, his whispering and his screaming and stuff he actually had to, like in the olden days, he had to move closer and further away from the microphone in order to get different levels. So basically you know if something is louder it’s actually coming closer to you. It’s a great track and you really hear that room. Hanna Bächer From your 1985 album, Halber Mensch. (music: Einstürzende Neubauten – “Seele Brennt”) Alexander Hacke There’s one more of course. Never mind. Gareth Jones I want to say something about that as well because the, I love the, I grew up loving, I still love, well classically music’s a very broad thing right? Obviously, but anyway, but I love dynamic in music and one of the awesome things about the Neubauten gig that I saw last Thursday is the huge dynamic in it. And for those people who attend, I mean everyone’s got their own geschmack, you know. Everyone should do what they want. But I really enjoyed hearing some of the participants’ music in Nalepastrasse this afternoon, but the thing that was missing for me in the big picture is dynamic. I’m just flagging it up − if you like dynamic, build it into your compositions. These guys, are building it into the composition back then, and they are still using huge dynamic live now. To me that’s fantastic. Alexander Hacke Yeah. Gareth Jones You know, I love, I fucking love that shit man. Alexander Hacke Thank you. Thank you. No, I think dynamics is very important because it’s about the spectrum and then, you know, we all know about the loudness wars in mastering, now that people just try to make the loudest possible records and the mastering engineer of Metallica apparently refused to have his name on the record for the way they wanted the music mastered and stuff like that. I think dynamics are very important and I love the time when the CD was invented, remember the first CDs? Particularly classical music CDs came out and they had to put a warning, warning stickers on the CDs, remember that? Saying like, “Careful, high dynamic range,” or something like that, because people were used to the dynamic range of a normal vinyl record and then the CD came and particular with classical music it would be the, like the overture would be very quiet and stuff like that. Then the actual first, you know movement would come in and would come in at a volume that would just kill people’s stereos. Gareth Jones Yeah, blow your speakers up, yeah. Alexander Hacke That was great, that time. I mean that’s the good thing about digital, is that you can conserve a much higher dynamic range. Gareth Jones Yeah, there’s lots of awesome things about digital. Our esteemed colleague, fellow worker, Mr. Brian Eno, says that anyone who romanticizes working on tape never did it. What we’re talking about I feel is the analog process. Which can be a room, like you’re working with Neubauten now, a room full of people and effects and amps and instruments. And another thing about dynamic I wanted to say is its interesting because in film dynamic is really big still. Even in mainstream Hollywood film. You know, if you watch Star Wars, sometimes it’s really bright. I’m not talking about the sound, I’m talking about the image. Sometimes it’s really dark. Duh. You know, because they have a really dark bit for ages, for like five minutes and then it goes really light. That’s really commercial and really exciting. It’s kind of got a bit lost in music because everyone’s trying to make it slam out the fucking iPhone. Don’t get me started actually. Alexander Hacke Yeah, yeah. No, but also I would add if you romanticize working with tape, you never worked with tape with a hangover. You know because that was the whole thing about, like if you had to − and again the danger of the medium. You know, if you would rehearse, if you would re-arrange music. You would first record it on a quarter-inch tape, on a schnürsenkel [German for shoelace], and then you would rehearse your edits there and then later on you would do the edits on the actual quarter-inch tape. Gareth Jones No, on the actual… Alexander Hacke On the actual two-inch tape, which on one hand was easier to edit because it was two inches, that thick, and not like the quarter-inch, just that thick. But it would be the real deal, and if you fucked that up, then you would be in trouble. And basically I remember when I had to cut tapes, and I did that for quite a while before actual sampling was invented. That we would cut tape loops and stuff, and it could be a very shaky business. I also did a lot of tape editing for cassette tapes. I would open cassette tapes up and actual edit the tape in a cassette too. There’s nothing to be romanticized about that. Gareth Jones There’s nothing, no. There’s not, no, and that’s not, that’s really super challenging and that’s one of the joys of two-track. I mean, now any edit is possible, right? Alexander Hacke Yeah. Gareth Jones Any edit is now possible, which is incredibly invigorating. Alexander Hacke Well yeah, and you would do cross-fades by actually cutting the tape diagonally. Right? Which was difficult too. Hanna Bächer It’s good that you mentioned the hangover, because there’s another kind of dynamic that I want to talk to you about, and that is sort of the dynamic in a group, playing in a band, and also between the producer and a band. Because the track we just heard, “Seele Brennt,” is on this album, I think usually refer to as being an album about a night on amphetamine and the hangover that goes with it, which is sort of the track that we just heard. How would you, as a producer, have stepped in that dynamic of a band who has been on drugs, as it's no secret either. Would you set up certain times? Would you think about that at all, or do things just happen? You laugh, which makes me assume that things just happened. Alexander Hacke You tell them, Jonesy. Gareth Jones No, I’m not laughing at… The idea of telling Neubauten what to do is absurd. Do you know what I mean? It’s just absolutely absurd. Anyway, I’m not that kind of producer. We were all a lot younger, OK? Don’t do drugs, kids, okay? I have to say that. Do not do drugs. But when I worked with, I don’t know who, I remember working with Neubauten very long hours, and I would like to work very long hours as well. I was already through my… I had a heavy amphetamine phase in London, which was not good for me. I was already through that. I had stopped using amphetamines because I thought, “Fuck, I’m never doing this again.” I nearly died, probably. So it’s not good. Because I’m excessive, you know? Anyway. I was working with them. There was some stimulants being taken, for sure. One of the really super positive things about it was, we’d work very late at night, and then usually, with a normal production, you’d work very late at night and the next day you’d rock up to studio at two in the afternoon or something, or one in the afternoon. And you’d wait around for hours for the band to turn up. But I remember working with you guys, and then, we’d work until three in the morning… Alexander Hacke And you were still there. Gareth Jones Yes! You were still there! Waiting at the studio door the next morning, at ten o’clock. Because you’d been on the town all night. That was incredible. Alexander Hacke Yeah. Let’s put it that way. You know, like that album, is not about amphetamine. It’s about never going to sleep and delusions of grandeur. Which boils down to the same thing, but let’s put it that way. Gareth Jones Yeah, yeah, yeah. So obviously it’s super challenging. And you have to remember that it was a time when there was a lot more money available for people like us to play about in spaces like this, which is awesome privilege for us. Huge growth experience for us. We learned so much. We formed lifelong friendships as well. So it’s incredibly important to our personal story. But there was − because people still bought music, and music’s obviously now free, because people still bought music − there was more money available, even for a bunch of weirdos like us, to be able to have to work in a space like this. All I’m saying now, is a lot of the younger groups I work with now are very focused on getting the most out of a studio time. In a way we just thought, it was self-evident we could have three weeks in Hansa to make a... You know what I mean? Alexander Hacke Yeah. Gareth Jones It’s kind of different vibe. Then if we hadn’t finished after three weeks, someone would phone the record company and say, “Oh, can we have another week, please?,” or something. And they’d go, “Yeah, no problem.” That never happens to me now. Alexander Hacke And also, I cannot emphasize it enough that ritualistic aspect of things. Not only working with analog, when we talked about earlier, but also in general when you produce music, or when you produce art. As it is in drugs, you have to have the set and the setting and the same counts for making art, I think. You have to have the right setting, the right people around you, and it’s that ritualistic aspect where you say, “I do this now.” And in order to do this now, I prepare myself in this and that way. There can obviously be great substitutes for drugs that also give you that same sense of the presence or the present. Like, nowadays, I light some incense. I know, because I have lit that incense, this is the time when I am going to do certain things. I set the occasion for that. I remember Gareth fixing a masala chai for us in a different studio, in the Tritono Studio. You know? Back in the day. That was a preparation. Masala chai is Indian spice tea, and it needed to boil or cook for hours or days or something, you know? Gareth would put on, prepare this tea for us, and boil it for hours and hours. I remember feeling that this was appropriate preparation for something great to happen. It’s very similar. The drug culture might give you an entrance into this way of thinking, without necessarily having to stick to those stupid substances that make you do stupid things. Hanna Bächer I spoke to a musician the other day, a jazz player called [inaudible] Smith. He’s Muslim. He told me that in his belief, he’s taught to step out of the house in the morning with his right foot first. What he actually does when he goes on stage is stepping onstage with the right foot first, for the sole reason that that means he’s doing it intentful. He is being aware of like, now he is stepping onstage. We compared a lot like, the technology back in the days and nowadays. Would you think that that is maybe posing a problem for people who work in bedroom studios? It’s kind of hard to step from your bed to your desk intentful, if it’s right next to each other? How do you create intentfulness? Gareth Jones Through physical and mental preparation. It’s perfectly possible to do. To me, a recording studio is still a wonderful space and a great privilege and you need a wonderful space. You’ve got a great space in Berlin, haven’t you, with Boris? If a bunch of people want to play together, you need a space. For me, a recording studio is like a state of mind now, where the laptop is the recording studio. There was a transitional moment in my life where my laptop became as powerful as the hands and mix room. I remember it quite well. I thought, “Oh, look. Everything that I had in the hands and mix room is now on my laptop.” Hanna Bächer When was that? Gareth Jones Four years ago, maybe. That was kind of mind blowing in some way. Studios exist everywhere. The only thing we can take responsibility for is ourselves now. And say, “Am I in the right space to enter my studio and do my best work?” I can do that sometimes in my bedroom. I can do that sometimes somewhere else. In my little shed that I work in in London, or in a recording studio. I did a piece recently where we collaborated remotely with Hamburg, Berlin and London. On the final day, everyone was working and feeding into the final mix. That was incredible. There was no studio involved on my end. I mean, there was, my laptop. I was in a bedroom, essentially. I think physical and mental preparation is hugely important. That can be different for everyone. I write a journal. I do it almost every day. It’s kind of my meditation. It’s here, actually. It’s pretty precious to me. It’s kind of part of my life. Recently, I’ve started lighting a candle. So in the morning, I take my green tea − and it’s just old hippy shit really. Sorry. Anyway, I take green tea and I light a candle, and then I go deep into myself and my journal, and then magic happens. Then I emerge and then I go to my day, and then magic happens. Alexander Hacke Yeah. I mean, after all, magic, imagination, you know we’re just picturing the things. You know? Like we do that with a certain preparation. Yeah, also that laptop thing, a few years ago in 2003... That’s not a few years ago, that’s many years ago now. Anyway, I decided that I didn’t want to work in a studio anymore. I decided to make a road record, like a film director makes a road movie. There’s certain parameters for a road movie. A road movie doesn’t have a fixed script or a script with no fixed ending, mostly, oftentimes. It is done during a journey, obviously. And, it is done involving the people that you meet on that journey. I decided to make a record that way. That was a very similar process or a very different process like that also, that one has to apply in modern times. Because now I could work with all kinds of very different musicians that I would never get into the same room into Berlin because they were from completely different genres of music, or they would live in completely different corners of the world. But I could have them play all the same music and also, I would record something. That means I would collect something, pick up something at one end of the world and while I was carrying it to the next place, I was, you know, fucking about with it. Processing it. Turning it. So it would turn the actual event during the journey into a different event and present the next person with it, who would then add something to it. Which again, would process during the journey. And that all happened, obviously in my little piece of digital equipment. Gareth Jones That’s a really interesting way of working. And it’s one way of tricking yourself. I made a record with my friend Nick Hook last year, which is called Spiritual Friendship, and we realized very early, it started off as a complete experiment and it stayed in experiment. We realized very early for us, that time in our life, he lives in New York and I live in London. The only way we could do it was by being in the same room. So we committed to the process, and our time is very precious to us because we had no money basically and every day we spent working together we were not generating any money, and so we didn’t waste each other’s time. We constantly tried to be hugely productive, focused, centered, present. Phones off, please. Internet off. Please. Be present. And that worked for us. We heard the final track from the album in Nalepastrasse earlier on, but it wasn’t anything loud enough so don’t judge the record from that. Hanna Bächer I want to listen to one other track that we spoke about earlier, actually, “Kein Bestandteil sein,” off another album, the second that you did together, Fünf auf der nach oben offenen Richterskala. Gareth Jones That’s a snappy title. (music: Einstürzende Neubauten – “Kein Bestandteil sein”) Alexander Hacke I can shortly explain what you are hearing. This was an experimental set-up that we did in this room also. Mufti is drumming on one of the Hansa chairs that they used, if you know old school chairs. He’s drumming on a chair, and we had set up an array of plastic tubes, maybe like 16 different plastic tubes, long plastic tubes that you get in the Walmart, in the home improvement store. And each with a microphone, and Gareth has leveled everything nicely, and Blixa was sitting at the mixing desk, turning the faders of each on and off, switching on the different plastic tubes and of course, every tube every different length has a different key. So he was actually playing a melody on the mixing desk while Mufti was just playing on the same chair. That’s what you’re hearing. Gareth Jones This is happening live in real time? Alexander Hacke Yeah. Some classic sociopath drumming there. Gareth Jones Of course, the lead vocal is not being done live there. We’re just talking about the tuning of the pipes. Hanna Bächer I remember a story that involved a gun. Is that actually on this track? Alexander Hacke No, that was… That’s on another track. There is a really funny story about when we recorded “Yü Gung,” feed my ego, or the track that involved... That was about, feed my ego, delusions of grandeur, staying awake, that kind of stuff. And it was the first track that involved sampling and a sequencer. So we recorded all these different... We recorded the blades that we use to edit the tapes before. We recorded the blades on different surfaces. Basically in the bathroom or the toilet, on the top of a toilet bowl, on cassette covers. We wanted this particular sound for the recording, I don’t know why. Andrew had a gun. He brought a gun to the session that would shoot blanks. As we were in the bathroom recording the blades, I thought it would be a really fun idea to shoot that gun, to give everyone in the control room a jump. Gareth Jones Because we’ve got the microphones on really loud, because we’re recording... Alexander Hacke Something very quiet. Gareth Jones Tiny sound, you know? Alexander Hacke Yeah. And I thought it would be such a great idea, just to shoot the gun. And so I thought, it might be even better if I open the toilet bowl and then shoot into the toilet bowl, which is... If you know something about acoustics and physics is the most stupid thing you can possibly do, because the sound of the bang gets bundled in the toilet bowl. It gets amplified, bundled and thrown back at you at least 10 times louder than the actual gun is already. So basically I shot in there, and my hearing just went off like that. And I couldn’t hear anything. The day was done for me. And the guys in the control room didn’t even notice that I was doing it because their equipment just shut down. It just went [click]. They didn’t even hear the bang. I was just coming in there and said like, “I know that was really stupid and I can’t hear anything.” And I walked out of the studio and I remember walking down Köthener Strasse to Anhalter Bahnhof and crying, thinking like, “I’m so stupid.” And I was so happy when the next day my hearing came back, finally. Gareth Jones We still experiment all the time. This is not just about the past. We still experiment all the time. Alexander Hacke Yes, let’s emphasize that. Gareth Jones Otherwise we can’t do anything new. And we never wanted to repeat ourselves. I never want to repeat myself. Alex, I think most... All the artists I know don’t want to repeat themselves. They constantly want to try and do something new. So we’re always experimenting. It’s kind of self-evident with the pipes, we’ve dreamed up a new experiment. The guys made an awesome installation in this room; there are some photographs somewhere. It was like a gallery of hanging metal and all kind of... It was amazing. And that was the process. No one knew exactly how that was going to turn out. But it is all about experimenting and I feel that’s really, it’s important to underline. Our lives have been lives full of creative experiments. Which means many of them turn out to be not usable. But that’s alright. Hanna Bächer Do you still approach sessions like this? Would you try to add experiments to a recording sessions even if you felt that the band wouldn’t be in a too experimental mood? Gareth Jones I don’t seem to attract artists who don’t want to experiment. Since we worked with people who are very interested in experimenting. Because that’s what keeps you fresh. It could be anything. It’s just a new experiment for a new team. Sometimes that can involve using three ideas that have been used in a different location by someone else. Then you put together and you go, “Oh look, if we did that and that and that and that. Wow, we’ve never done that, let’s try that!” I thought lots of the work that I did earlier in my career was completely original, but it probably wasn’t. It was just built on something that someone else... But it was new to me. And new to the people I was working with, and that’s super important. Because if you feel that you’ve made something truly new, that’s a wonderful thing. It’s like a new life, a little life is emerged into the world. Hanna Bächer You’ve talked about this building quite a bit with this being used as a recording room, and then sort of a mixing room somewhere. If we think about these last two Neubauten albums that you did here, how many people were actually involved? Like how many people had to work on this for it to work with so many different rooms? Alexander Hacke See, that’s the difference between those days and nowadays, too. Back then you had all these people involved that had to bear with us in a way. Nowadays, when I do things or when I go into a creative mode or when I work with Danielle or something like that, we have the ability to lock ourselves away and get deep into some experimentation and we don’t have to apologize to anyone afterwards. Back in the days here, it would be the poor tape operators that we tortured and once in a while I meet some of the old guys that used to work here. It’s like, “Oh yeah. I remember you.” Gareth Jones They love you, man. They love you. Alexander Hacke That’s the difference but that’s also what makes a great studio like this or like Conny’s studio, Conny Plank’s studio in Wolperath near Cologne, im Bergischen Land. There was also one of these cult places and I consider these places − and please forgive me for these semi-religious references − but I think this actually is a temple. This is what it was for us. And there are a few studios nowadays that are still around that would qualify, by my book, to be a temple of creation, like this place used to be. And therefore, I think it is important and this is what Gareth is trying to say, I believe, by reminding you all of the fact that these stories from the past are the stories from the past, but then what we do today is to transport that energy that we had back in those days. That we try to achieve that same intensity with different tools on different levels and we should never stop trying to do this. As soon as we start to work with any sort of formula and as soon as we start to not take any risks, we might as well do something else. Gareth Jones Yes! Hanna Bächer Because what you did a few years ago, it’s like you embarked on a journey. Well, a continuous journey a few years ago with your partner and your musical partner as well, Danielle. And you don’t have a home anymore, so you work from on the road. Do you do that to create that intensity, to create from that? Alexander Hacke Absolutely. I mean that was a transformational process, because in order to do that, it started out that we rented this house here in Berlin that contained our studios. We lived there in that building from 2003 to 2010, for seven years until we realized, this is ridiculous. We have this wonderful building that we rent, it even has a garden and everything. But we can’t have animals, we can’t really take care for the garden, and we can’t really enjoy the house because we travel all the time in order to pay the rent for it. Berlin was just not happening for us at the time. And we decided to go on an eighteen-month journey in order to relocate. In order to do that, we had to get rid of all our material belongings. That means we divided everything in three. One part went into the trash or we sold it. One part we sold, one part went in the trash, and one part we put in storage. But basically we had to get rid of everything, and that was a very transformational process. That’s a really great. I can recommend it. Try to get rid of your stuff and the truth will set you free, I tell you. Because you start to realize all the time you spent in earning the money to purchase the stuff that you then have to take care for, you’re responsible for that stuff. Once you get rid of it, you feel a lot better. But anyhow, we didn’t find anything after eighteen months − this was seven years ago − so for seven years now, we’ve been traveling the world and we learned a lot about the world and we learned a lot about our creative process and abilities by living that way. Gareth Jones I want to say something about connection, because you said, “How many people were involved in some of this work that we were privileged to do?” So that’s a big question. Because I think in society, there’s an idea that we’re disconnected from each other and we all live in selfish little worlds, right? So we worked in this room. Now this room was built by 200 guys, maybe? In 1920? I don’t know how many people built it. Hanna Bächer 1913. Gareth Jones Whenever it was built, it’s an old room. That’s a lot of people already. People grew the food that we ate whilst we were making the album, people delivered strom und wasser [electricity and water], and people took the shit away from the toilets. So that’s a lot of people already. Someone made the mixing desk that we worked on. A big team of people, Neve in the seventies, probably 250 people in the company. Someone shipped the mixing desk from London to Berlin. Someone cabled it in. Someone built all the microphones, and on and on and on and on, man. It’s a huge network of human collaboration in each of these pieces. Now someone will say if you run Gamer you will say that the right of copyright belongs to the person who wrote the chords or the lyrics. But there’s a massive human endeavor goes into all this. I heard a wonderful spiritual teacher, Thich Nhat Hanh, speak where he said when he wakes up in the morning and he washes his face in the basin... He’s a very present man, he’s ill now, he’s very present. So he’s aware of the fact that the water that he’s washing his face has fallen from the cloud, into the mountain and come all the way to his hand. So I’m just very aware of that. It’s a very big question. So how many people involved in recording “Seele Brennt”? I don’t know, 25 million or something? I don’t know. A lot of people were involved. It wasn’t just me and Alex and the band and the assistant. Alexander Hacke It’s a professional hazard. An occupational hazard, as you might put it, because we work in the field of vibrations. Music is vibrations. Science knows by now that we are all vibrations anyway so there’s no real separation between you or me or him or us. So we are all involved in the same thing. Gareth Jones Thank you. And I want to just amplify what Alex said, I did a similar thing. I have a little work room, studio in London that I did. Not the same thing as you did. It got too expensive for me. Same kind of time, maybe, 2005 or something like that. It just got too expensive. So I sold as much as I could and what I couldn’t sell, I put in the trash. Almost everything went, apart from some microphones that I bought in the eighties here that I thought, “These are beautiful, they don’t take up much space, I’m still making music, I’m gonna keep these.” Everything went. And then I rebuilt my toolkit with what I felt I needed. And that’s changed the vibrational energy in my workspace massively now because everything now in my workspace, I use. And before, a lot of it I was just like working to keep it repaired. So that if I wanted to use it, it would be working, you know what I mean? Everything changed. It was a really great process getting rid of shit and kind of rebooting. Hanna Bächer Before we maybe open it up to questions, in case there are any, I thought it would be nice to briefly speak about Diamanda Galás because this is an artist who’s gonna play here in Berlin in two days and who both of you knew in the ’80s and you, Gareth, worked with. You look shocked. You’re trying to get in there to change over to the… Who you I think must’ve met around the same time as Neubauten, is that right? Alexander Hacke Diamanda came to Berlin on a DAAD grant in the ’80s, which is Deutsche Akademishe Austauche Dienst. That means she actually got funded to live here for a while and to write music, and that’s how we met her and struck up a bit of a friendship during that time. And she worked with Gareth. We were also label mates. We are all on Mute Records at the time. Gareth Jones And that is still a thing and that’s a family thing. Being on the same label means something, even on a label as diverse as Mute Records. I think people are aware of the fact that… In fact, I met Diamanda because her brother, who’s now dead, was a gay man and she had struck up a friendship with another gay Mute artist, Andy Bell from Erasure. And Andy had said how much he enjoyed working with me and how sensitive I was to capturing the human voice or whatever. Something very nice. I love Andy, he’s a dear friend. So Diamanda thought, “Ah! That sounds interesting. Maybe that’s the dude I need to work on my next album.” So I met him. In fact, I met Diamanda through the label so that’s all I’m saying, underlining that, what you said. And obviously, she’s an awesome woman and I heard her play. The first time I heard her play in Berlin, I was like at the back of the hall somewhere and tears were just running down my cheeks because it was so emotionally cathartic, I suppose. It was very, very powerful. And we had the great, it’s just a pleasure and a privilege… This temple has been a bit desecrated actually, because now it’s turned into like a corporate meeting space. I know we’re all kind of artists and musicians here, so we’re not feeling too corporate. We’re feeling pretty cool. But, I’m sorry, but I feel the temple’s been desecrated. This is no longer the temple of sound. Hanna Bächer And one question, regarding that. Does it matter to you or did it matter to you that you were at one point not able to see the wall anymore from here? People refer to the studio and David Bowie said it in so many interviews that you could actually see the wall separating both parts of Berlin from here and that it mattered to him. Did it matter to you when it came down? Were you feeling that this space lost something? Gareth Jones Me personally? No. It didn’t matter to me, I don’t think I was working here. I think I’d moved on somewhere else. But also it was very desolate, wasn’t it? Potsdamer Platz was very empty. Alexander Hacke A wasteland, there was nothing there out there. You could watch... It went on for miles. There was nothing there. Which obviously was a great kind of view to have, like upstairs there’s these balconies and you could take a view. Gareth Jones It beats looking at the Sony Building or something, for me anyway. Alexander Hacke Absolutely. Even though I don’t think it’s too bad actually, that Sony Center. I think I kind of grew to like that architecture. And it’s the only cinema that plays only original version of movies. Gareth Jones There you go, that’s probably why I went. OK, I take it back. Alexander Hacke But the thing is, it obviously and we knew at the time when that happened, not when the reunification happened but when the wall came down that it would obviously be a game changer. It would obviously change our lives forever. And it did. And the city that I was born in and raised in does not exist anymore. I mean that’s just an incredible thing to be able to say for yourself. “Well, the city I was born in doesn’t exist anymore. No, it’s not there anymore, it’s a different city now.” Hanna Bächer Nor does the country, in a way. Alexander Hacke Nor does the country. That’s a thing. I was born in the West so the country does still exist but the city doesn’t exist. If I was born in the East, then the country wouldn’t exist either. Gareth Jones But that’s − and I know you get this − that’s a kind of thing ... Everything is change. Everything is change. I am change, you are change, she is change, we are all change. Life is change. So in a way, the city’s changed is all we’re saying. Of course it’s not the same. London’s not the same city that I was in. No way is it the same city. I guess West Berlin’s changed more, somehow. At this stage of its development. But you know, the British changed Dresden profoundly in the Second World War. Cities are change. The Germans changed the East End of London massively. It’s not the same city as it was, but then once you accept that life is change, we could say, “Well, actually, it is the same city.” I’m the same person that I was when I was two years old, but I’m not. But I am. Life for me is paradox, so I embrace paradox as I’ve got older. I’ve understood that it’s not black or white, its black and white. It’s not yes or no, very often, the most important things in my life, it’s yes and no. Particle and wave. Alexander Hacke Rock steady. Hanna Bächer Should we give these two a big round of applause? [applause]

---

Title: Claudio Rispoli
Date: 2017-07-21
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/claudio-rispoli/

Claudio Rispoli
At its peak in the mid-’70s, Italy’s Baia Degli Angeli was the most glamorous and musically adventurous nightclub in Europe, a rival to New York’s Studio 54. Spread over four floors, the focus of the club’s over-the-top interior was the moving DJ booth – located inside a glass elevator – where Claudio Rispoli, AKA Moz-Art, hypnotized clubbers with an eclectic selection of disco hits, soul, reggae, Afrobeat and even library music. The off-kilter DJing style he perfected alongside fellow Baia DJ Daniele Baldelli was dubbed “cosmic disco.” As he tells us in this lecture from the 2004 Red Bull Music Academy, creating the perfect night out is “something you don’t do for money.”
Hosted by Emma Warren We’re very lucky today. We’ve got Claudio Rispoli, from the north of Italy, who, along with Daniele Baldelli, worked at a really famous club called Baia de... Claudio Rispoli Baia degli Angeli, yes. Emma Warren That’s it. Which kind of engendered this whole scene in Italian music called cosmic, which ended up being, it’s like the greatest secret that people don’t know about. It was this really intense, famous disco scene which was basically doing similar things, or even pre-dating, what was happening in New York disco. Claudio now has been part of Jestofunk for how long now? Claudio Rispoli In ‘93 we started. Emma Warren OK, so for 10 years now. We’re going to kind of chat through that whole period in Italian music history, your own personal background, and some of the things you’ve been doing over the last ten years with Jestofunk. I think it might be nice to start with you and how you got into music. Claudio Rispoli I played the piano in the National School of Music in Italy before I became a DJ. I started to DJ, like, easy. One summer I started [DJing], in the middle of the summer, because it was something I felt from the beginning. Emma Warren What actually happens to people to make them start DJing? When’s the moment they get their first record? When’s the first time they actually put the needle on the record, on the decks? How did that happen for you? Claudio Rispoli It was a little club in the Riviera in Italy. Emma Warren How old were you then? Claudio Rispoli I was 16. It was a lady that was a DJ. She was French. The club was a little club. They were playing very, very good music, like Philadelphia and Motown things. It was the best period for music, I think. You remember, The Temptations period. Emma Warren You mentioned Philly and Motown soul which, as far as I can gather, became the beginning part of what you ended up doing with the music. That seemed to be the groundstone from which you started? Was Philly and Motown, was that sound really popular throughout Italy, or did you have to be a real music fan to be into that kind of music? Claudio Rispoli No, no, no. There was nothing in Italy at that moment, but the Baia degli Angeli was something out of what Italy was at that moment. To fill the club you have to wait for the people that come from a long distance as well, like Milan or Rome. Emma Warren In order to understand how this club happened and what it was really like, it’s good to get an idea about the general Italian music scene, or club scene, before it started. You said you first started to play at this very small club in the Riviera that was playing Philly Soul and Motown. Was that unusual? Were there many clubs? Claudio Rispoli No, no, it was unusual, because most of clubs played different music. Now if you want to find particular music you can go everywhere. It was the same at that time. In particular, Baia was a club where we [were together] in the afternoon. We live together. It’s not people that work in the bar, and one works on the door. We are friends. We stay together all day. So in the afternoon we do something for the lighting, or something to [decorate] a particular part of the club. This is not normal. Emma Warren The club itself sounds amazing. Three floors, but five different levels. The DJ played in a glass elevator that rose up and down between the levels. Claudio Rispoli It was two floors. Emma Warren Two floors. OK. It was like the most extreme New York disco, if you imagine your ideas about New York disco in the ‘70s. Your club had it all. Claudio Rispoli The boss of this club, I think before he did this, he took a long time. A lot of inspiration he took from New York, exactly. But he went as well to Hong Kong and Japan to see [the new] technology. He came back with a lot of ideas. A lot of things were Andy Warhol things inside. Nobody in Italy at the time knew Andy Warhol. Everything was new. Emma Warren Obviously the way that the club developed was partly because of the personalities involved, but partly because the guy that ran the club [Giancarlo Tirotti] had been to New York and had seen the discos. Is that right? Claudio Rispoli Yeah. It started with two DJ from the States. They flew here. One was Bobby Day. One was Tom Sison. There was also a black boy called Sterling [St. Jacques] who danced incredibly. He went with the lights. It was great. Just [for] one year, then it changed all the time. Emma Warren We do need to talk about the club and all those things. It just sounds like a completely incredible point of history. Before we talk more about that, it’d be good to talk about you. You said that you started DJing when you were 16. Was it something that you knew you wanted to do, or was it something that you fell into? Claudio Rispoli It’s something that I could understand, and I don’t think so much. I feel I do it because it’s just that calling, you know what I mean? The energy was what I liked. Now I don’t go to work, but I love to do it. It’s not because I close something. I want to say something just for them. Emma Warren You said that it’s something that you still do. I’m kind of jumping forward here but I noticed there was an Earth, Wind, and Fire gig to celebrate the anniversary of the club. This was last year was it? Or this year? Is that right? Claudio Rispoli Yeah. Emma Warren Were you playing at that? Do you still sometimes play at events? Claudio Rispoli Just in Bologna. It was so nice because just the summer before we have tour. We have four gigs with them. They played Jestofunk. More was in Bologna, Kool and the Gang, which I love to see because... Emma Warren I bet that must have been a good gig. Claudio Rispoli Yeah, yeah. I don’t think what they do in Italy to celebrate the club comes very good. Maybe just in Bologna. Milano and Rome, I don’t think they do. They have problem. Emma Warren Is this something that happens every year? When did the club close? When did the club finish? Claudio Rispoli They changed the name after 10 years and it was not the same thing. I think 1980 was the last year. Emma Warren It says something about how important that club was or how respected it is that they’re still celebrating it on an annual basis. Is the club seen as being very important in your area? Claudio Rispoli Yeah, I think in all Italy. The ground there is not normal for a place, for a disco club. It’s more known like a temple. Maybe you feel like freedom when you think of that, or maybe something magic. It was something magic. Emma Warren You started out playing Philly soul, Motown, these kind of things. Eventually you become a DJ. You start working at this club. What kind of music were you playing when you first started playing at the Baia? Claudio Rispoli I tell you, I started to play in this little club. I came with friends, with these new people though. They started in the Baia the same year. When I know them, I go to leave there but I work in the little club, like ten kilometers away. When I finish work, I go home and watch Baia. Emma Warren You were going to the club you mean? Claudio Rispoli No, I live with them, but I work in another place. Because in this place the American people worked. I was so young. I got energy. I needed to – I say work, but I needed to play. Then I finish, I come back. The Baia was open just Saturday. I worked all the summer, like everyday. All the people from there came to me, like Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, the other days. The year after that I start to play the [Baia]. Emma Warren Maybe you can give us some kind of idea about what kind of place this was. Claudio Rispoli It was something that you don’t do for money. This is so important for what we talking about. If you take away this from this kind of thing… Emma Warren You mean if you take money issues out of it? Claudio Rispoli No, no, no. If you do the club just to make money, you do something that everybody can do. Baia has a problem with the money. Exactly different, because you can imagine... Every time it gets bigger. In the winter we stop in May. We close for one month to make some different things. But the on last day of every period, all the bar was open for everybody. The people come and take the drink. There are no people that give you anything. You go and you take. The people can take home also a bottle of everything. They charge the bar more than one time, so by 4 o’clock it’s impossible to find a drink. This is crazy. It’s no, how you say, benefit. No, you don’t take money. Now they took exactly. It’s something that is for the people. I don’t know. Emma Warren It would be good to talk about some of the creative things that happened in the club. Yourself and the other DJs were doing things that didn’t happen again in music for many, many years. Playing 33 rpm records at 45, playing 45 records at 33. Using drum machines, triggering samples, all these kind of things. It would be great if you could maybe try and give us an idea about the spectacle of the night. Like, what would you see when you walked in on an average night. What was the picture in front of you? Claudio Rispoli I think the [main part] of the concert is the music and also the lighting, and Baia was very, very incredible because there was a mechanical thing with a big, big laser on and this laser was very, very powerful. Emma Warren This is a big laser you had in the middle of the club? Claudio Rispoli No, no, it was outside and this thing goes on every floor, but also on the sea. If you go on the sea, it was the people that was with the navy that were calling to the police, because we trust them, you know? Emma Warren You’re causing some havoc with the sailors? Claudio Rispoli There is a lot of technology as well, like you say, the elevator, and the problem of the DJ on the elevator, that you push and you go down, and the record, you know [mimes a record wobbling up and down]. We’re talking about ‘76, ‘77. Emma Warren You know, it’s kind of mind-blowing, really, to imagine this club, in the mid-70s in northern Italy that had a glass elevator as a DJ booth. I mean, it’s such a kind of disco idea. Who was it who actually came up with this? Claudio Rispoli I DJed, but in the afternoon I make white everything. Emma Warren So you painted the walls white? Claudio Rispoli Know what I mean? It’s something you do just for your home, you don’t do it because they ask you. All of the people that work together there are feeling like that. We’re going to find all of the particular things, for example, or before the particular day.… I don’t remember, it was Christmas or something like this. We take all the body of us and we designed [inaudible]. Emma Warren You designed... Claudio Rispoli Yeah, just the other thing and then we cut all the things. We make in a long [corridor] in the club, just pink or green, you know, these [shapes]. Emma Warren You were all very involved in the design. Claudio Rispoli Then with the lighted tree in front, and in the night with the strobes, it gives you exactly some movement. It was [our work] on the wall. Easy, cost nothing, it was just something creative. Emma Warren I mean you mentioned with the glass elevator, that the problem you have when you have a DJ booth in a elevator is when it stops on a floor the needle jumps. I heard that you had to find some very specific new technology within turntables to be able to manage this. What happened? Claudio Rispoli It was a big, big, how do you say... [offers Italian word]? Just that cost like three of that [points to turntable in front of them]. You know, because there’s a hollow in the side... But now in Torino, there is another place after Baia, they opened there and they took all the [ideas] from there. They have more problems like this, because it’s a very big elevator, but like a farm elevator, you know? When it starts, it goes like, “Doosh!” And so it was very incredible thing. Emma Warren Would you play in the glass elevator? Would you DJ in there? Claudio Rispoli In Baia, in Torino. Emma Warren What were you playing? What music were you playing, what were the kind of big records for you? Claudio Rispoli One of my favorite groups was The Blackbyrds. I think it’s important group, like also now in the story of some contaminated music like… also hip-hop. I don’t like to say exactly a definition to the music, because now it’s very complicated. It’s a lot of contamination, so how you say, I suggest it’s the limit, you know, or anyway… Emma Warren Is it fair to say that at this point in the mid ‘70s you were playing a kind of very eclectic mix of soul, funk, disco, reggae? Claudio Rispoli Yeah, whatever, whatever. I remember, for example, we play Temptations or Smokey Robinson for example. Then, I loved one track by Queen. They’re not my preferred group, for me as well, but one track was so funky and was so lovely and I don’t know who they are, I don’t care, you know? You like, you play. Emma Warren At the club, you’d hear Smokey Robinson and then you might hear Queen? Claudio Rispoli Yeah. Emma Warren It sounds like a great club. It sounds like one of the great clubs. Do you think that the fact that you did have this very eclectic attitude to what you were playing... you know, you loved Smokey Robinson but if you liked a Queen tune, you’d play it. Did that contribute to it becoming such a great club? Claudio Rispoli Yeah. Yeah, I think it’s something that... the Baia is a different thing. I put myself in a position together... a lot of things for making it an important one, you know? For the music that after that you’re going around to play, you do all just with your hands. Emma Warren I mean, I think a lot of the great clubs in the last sort of 30 years have had a combination of some very specific things. There’ve been great spaces that have had a lot of effort put into them and they’ve had the kind of really wild playlist. You take Alfredo in Ibiza, with the clubs. Claudio Rispoli I don’t understand nothing of what you say. You are like Oxford now, actually. [laughter] Emma Warren What I was saying was that all of the great clubs in history have had two main things with them. They’ve had a great space, where there’s a lot of energy put into the décor, so it looks great, but the playlist has been very broad. For example, Alfredo in Ibiza, with his clubs Amnesia and Coup, they were incredible spaces, really wild clubs, but they played what they liked and you could say the same thing about Studio 54 in New York. Were you aware of what was happening with disco in New York with clubs like Studio 54? Claudio Rispoli I never go there. I just went there like five years ago, the first time I went to New York. Maybe it was better, I don’t know, because I take with me a little illusion, maybe it’s like if you go to London. Maybe to see the States you have to run away to a different place, or you have to take some car, drive or something like this, because New York I think is very European right now. But the music that we played, that period... We had only just one place where it’s possible to find [records] directly from the States, there was nothing... Emma Warren So you’re saying there was only one place you could go and buy records at this time? Was it quite hard to find records or did you just... Claudio Rispoli Yeah. Anywhere, yeah. Emma Warren What kind of things were you buying? What records were you buying? Claudio Rispoli What, when? Emma Warren Just when you’re talking about at the club. Claudio Rispoli Oh. I tell you, I worked with Daniele and a lot of records I play and I don’t listen just in the afternoon. Just like this, because... There was a moment that the record was good, most of them. In the ‘78, ‘79 start, also, you find a lot mixed very, very oddly, and you have to work a lot for... for just take. Emma Warren You mean, it became difficult to mix records because... Claudio Rispoli No, no, no, just because it was a moment that everybody go to find, maybe like now, the [inaudible], no? Also the black people start to play commercial music. You understand what I mean? It’s not exactly what we like. I’m talking about the greats. Stevie Wonder. I have all the old records, but not the new ones, because... I think the great thing he do in the past. Emma Warren Well, I guess that’s something that happens with artists isn’t it, when they have a kind of very strong period and then, maybe not so strong. If we just talk about some of the innovations that you and Daniele Baldelli, who you played with at this club. Some of the technical things that you developed were really incredible. I mean, is it true to say that you would play records at the wrong speed on purpose because you preferred the way they sounded? Claudio Rispoli What is the right speed? What’s happening now with the cutting and the mixing [is also not at the right speed]. It’s something that maybe we do before then, because we don’t have a sampler, but we have a mixer. There was a very, very incredible turntable, because from 35 maximum, you are very near to 45 minimum. The difference is very little. But we are talking about particular music, you can... It’s not tracks like a single track that counts like Donald Duck, or you know... It’s something that has an emotional thing, and if not, you don’t play. It’s not a fashion, it’s not something [we do because other people are doing it]. For example, some Jamaican style. Emma Warren Some Jimmy Castor. Claudio Rispoli Jamaican style, yeah. Some dub. The first dub. Emma Warren You found that all the reggae stuff that you were playing responded well to being pitched up? Claudio Rispoli Yeah. The people that play reggae music don’t think so, actually. [Laughs] But anyway, we was on the dancefloor. Emma Warren What was it like on the dancefloor when you were playing these records? Claudio Rispoli If you want exactly my sensation, when I work anyway, because I don’t change anything, it’s like, I wait for myself, you know? I stay like this, but when I start, there’s something that [affects] me. I can’t control it. There’s something natural that, I say, I feel like it’s from the stomach, you know. It’s not my mind. It’s something like a snake, you know, it’s an energy, like that [clenches fists]. You can say funk, you can say... I say it’s something that comes out and you don’t know [what it is]. It’s like a psycho thing, after ten minutes you work, you are... [makes closed motion with arms] close on that. This is like, for me, for what I think, I say my religion, it's something great. Emma Warren That idea of it being a religion seemed to be shared by a lot of the kids that were coming to the clubs. We’ve heard stories about kids who would drive many, many miles just to park in the car park outside the club, blare out mixtapes and not even go to the club. It seemed like there was this huge cult following. Is that what happened? What was that like? Claudio Rispoli I don’t know. You ask me something. Emma Warren Were you aware of that? Were you aware of these kids driving up and parking outside the club, almost having their own mini-party because they thought what you were doing was so great? Claudio Rispoli This is something that I don’t understand so much, but maybe because there were some parties with a very lot of people. Anyway, the Baia was incredible in the front. [There were] 5,000, 4,000 [people] and in a very little country [that] was also a problem. But the club that I remember in myself better is club that closed very straight. One was in France and was called Goody Goody. Very, very small. It’s impossible to speak in there. The music was very, very like [points up] up here. Emma Warren Literally the speakers were placed above you? Claudio Rispoli It was very, very, very little. I think we do there the best music. The best we play just [with] one ear. The police closed everything. Emma Warren Where was this club? Claudio Rispoli It was between Rimini and Bologna. Emma Warren It was called... Claudio Rispoli Goody Goody. Emma Warren Goody Goody. What were you playing there? You said you played the best music you’d ever played at this club, at Goody Goody. Claudio Rispoli Because I play the art thing. I feel like I don’t have 2,000 people. I never do this. They push you the problem of you have [to keep] the dancefloor. You pay attention to not losing the dancefloor. This is shit in the mind of a DJ. It’s something that takes you away from all the mystic things that you can take with you. I don’t like it. Now it is not important to do anything creative. I feel like this. This club give you the chance for – also Baia – this club we could play the Herbie Hancock thing, the first Herbie Hancock thing. Emma Warren You could play what? Claudio Rispoli It was very hard to play in the disco, the first Herbie Hancock thing was just funk jazz, but very, very, very, very hard, uptempo. Emma Warren A lot of the people in the room here are DJs. Are you saying that for you, you found it a pressure to be playing for 2,000 people? You didn’t want to keep 2,000 people happy? For you it was better to be in a small club? Claudio Rispoli No, no, no. If you are in Baia degli Angeli this is not a problem. If you go in Veneto, for example, and you go where all day they play Lessia. They play folk music. They pay you, you know what I mean? For me it’s no problem. I don’t care about what’s happened but I don’t lose the dancefloor so I don’t have the problem. But it’s something that I feel because it’s my job. This is something that will kill you year after year. In time you don’t understand that you don’t [take] risks. You play the same thing that everybody plays for example. What is different between you and the other? Emma Warren It sounds like you by this point developed a very distinctive DJing style. Over in New York, someone like Francis Grasso was developing a mixing style where he once said that he changed records every two minutes 12 seconds, because he had so much to get through. He wouldn’t ever just let the record play. He was in there the whole time doing stuff, manipulating it, mixing it. Was that similar to your style? Claudio Rispoli No, but sometimes I have a problem. I have five, six records out everywhere like this [gestures around]. I lose [track] because you change idea very easy. If you have emotions like this you make... Sometimes I used to play a record that was one minute and it was finished. You have time just to do what you have to do. It’s something that I want to do. You know that you have 50 seconds, then it’s finished. It’s just a very little part. It’s possible, but if I have a very, very good record that is long, ten minutes, I play ten minutes. Emma Warren Francis Grasso was in the period where
François Kevorkian was producing for Salsoul and was DJing. You had all these seminal American DJs coming through like David Mancuso, Nicky Siano, Francis Grasso was... Claudio Rispoli But everybody these people, there’s one up that for them is the best one, it's Larry Levan. Emma Warren Larry Levan? He was the one that you liked best? Claudio Rispoli No. I see a film this year. I know the people that produce that. I see everybody talking about him like art. I understand that he represents something for them very important. For [doing] this job. For also for the future. You think of him because he did something very special. It’s not possible to see nothing in the film because it was just in the States, you can take any film in the clip, it was just from long time ago. Emma Warren There’s no film? Claudio Rispoli Just a very little, like, second of thing. Because the people can’t take anything in the club that was out of those limits. Emma Warren You had no rules and regulations? People could take drugs if they wanted to, when they wanted to and it was no problem, but there was no film? Claudio Rispoli I don’t think it was just for the privacy. It’s not just for that. Also [for those] in the club that don’t take anything it’s the same. The people that take something, there’s no problem. Emma Warren You must have some kind of interesting memories from your period working in discos throughout the late ’70s. When you think about that time what comes to mind? What kind of stories come to mind? Grace Jones used to come to your clubs. Claudio Rispoli Nothing. It’s a big monument, but just that. Now is now. It’s like your desire wants something that is impossible to have and still believe. I think it’s possible, anytime in your life you have something to chase out, to understand what you can do. I think about music of course. You take energy. You be strong from there. It’s impossible to explain, like what I try to do now, what was. It’s impossible to do something that, “Ah, we do this. Oh, great.” You need new ideas, new stuff, and something very, very fresh to create something. Emma Warren You’re not really into nostalgia for that period of time? Claudio Rispoli No, no, no, no. Not exactly. Nostalgia is just for something that you can see. It’s something like for a planet. Not for a period of your life. It’s gone. Emma Warren You’re talking about always having to push things forward to keep them fresh. It sounds like at some period when you were DJing and you were playing these kind of soul, and funk, and reggae you started to incorporate an Afro sound into the music. Maybe you can tell us about how that happened? Claudio Rispoli When I know Fela Kuti or this kind of music, I love the way you can jump, I love the way you can dance with the percussion, but also the rhythm that he has and the way of singing. So I play that. This [genre] is the definition [but] I don’t like that. The music is global thing. Emma Warren Your music’s a global thing? Claudio Rispoli Yeah. You play James Brown and you are Afro. What is Afro James Brown? Because he’s black? It’s something that gives you… After you see the people with the bongos everywhere. You can say it’s stupid. You don’t need this or this for represent something. Maybe this is a change. Maybe the people are going to find something special about your movement, that is yours. Not because you’ve got a dress here or you go to buy something there. Italy was very long from that state, that moment anyway. I remember the Saturday camps from Milano. People like 30, 40 boys in Fiorucci stuff, the first Fiorucci stuff – in Italy everybody knows, maybe also in the States. They were strange people. Emma Warren Are you saying that kids from London came to your club dressed in Fiorucci clothes? Claudio Rispoli No, from Milano. People just from Milano. There’s a big, big shop in Milano. When they knew about this club, the Saturday they came to dance. They made promo for us incredible. They are people like now you pay to come and dance inside. They just came. This was great. Emma Warren Who are these people from Milan? Claudio Rispoli Just people that work in the shop of fashion. They came to dance like this. In the summer you could find [inaudible], the son of one of the presidents of Warner Bros. Carmen Electra was the big PR of Studio 54. In the summer she come to find us. This is because the boy that started Baia [Giancarlo Tirotti] for first time is from Rome, this boy. He lives in Romania but is from Rome. He is an architect and is a big mind. Now he is working in near to Gabicce, near to where the place of Baia is, and he makes big golf courses. You go inside and there’s the water. You go in this hotel and you walk in the water. He is a great people. Maybe if you think, if it become nostalgia to him, we can do some new thing. Emma Warren Mm-hmm. Claudio Rispoli Because he know what he do. Emma Warren You’re saying a lot of people that are involved in this club scene at this point in Italy went off to do very interesting things. It spread. It had an influence that was noticed in America. It had an influence that meant that individuals went off to do interesting things, to open these crazy hotels or to do good things. Is that right? Claudio Rispoli Yeah, but there’s something that these great people can do, you know? I say this because with the Baia it was him that organized everything. Before the start, he had everything in the mind. He was in New York to understand the way to make this great thing. When he comes back, he can say to us, “We do it like this or we do it like this.” Just run – and what’s come out is this. So it’s important, the mind in question. After him, the life of Baia was a reflection of that. Emma Warren We’ve come to refer to this whole period as cosmic, Italian cosmic or cosmic disco. What does cosmic mean? Claudio Rispoli Was a club after Baia. I make intention to make confusion about this because for me there is any... The period was after, and was very straight on. We started the contamination of electronic things, but I don’t like what start from there. It’s like a circus. The start is like we start the circus. I don’t say only cosmic. You go to work but you go to someone that you don’t know. He pay you. With your energy you can do something, but it’s not the same thing. It’s not like you live with people and they want this and you do. It’s also about business. What we are talking about now was no business. One of the facts that led to the closure of the club was the money that the people wanted. The people that worked on the lighting, the people that work with the music, because it was not always a big business. We do it because we like [it]. Emma Warren A lot of people here would’ve had the experience, the people that run their own clubs or DJ a lot, of exactly that problem of clubs not being able to work because too many people want too much money. What advice would you give people that are running their own clubs, who want to put on really special parties? What’s the most important element to putting on a really special party? Claudio Rispoli If someone asks me to go to play a night now, I don’t go, because I’m staying good now, like this. There is one club that if they call me, I go. This in Perujia, it’s near to Perujia, because it’s very different. It’s just black, there’s nothing. It’s like a cultural place. Emma Warren It’s like a cultural place? Claudio Rispoli Yeah. Just with the speakers, a good, good system, and just music. If this guy calls me, I go to work. Daniele calls me, I go. But if they ask me, “Oh, you are interested to come and do a night?” I don’t go. Emma Warren What advice would you give someone? I mean, obviously ... Claudio Rispoli It’s what you say. I tell you this because, it’s not how big the name of the club is, but what you find when you go. What the club gives you when you finish playing. You know what the club gives you. You can go away and you say, “Great music. I can play good music.” Or you can go, wait a second, huh. Emma Warren So from a DJ’s point of view, it’s all about being able to play the kind of music you want to play and feeling like people are doing it out of love, rather than money? Claudio Rispoli Yeah. It’s like if I go to work with Daniele or I can say a lot of people that work with Daniele. They do half a thing but they do other things, but they also do something that is very far from what I do. For me, it’s hard. They don’t understand, but for me it’s hard. The people, they wait for one kind of music. They want that. And this is something that, in a way, I don’t like because I can play whatever, if I like. But afterwards they say, “You don’t play this, you don’t play this.” It’s also people that you play funky, but funky then more than that is not, and they come to say, “Oh, you don’t play funky.” Emma Warren Yeah, I’m sure that everybody who plays has had that experience of people trying to pressurize them into playing in a certain direction. One thing I did want to ask you about was a kind of move into production. Around the early ‘80s you starting making records as well. How did that happen? Claudio Rispoli The record in question? They produced me. It was not very good experience. It was good for what we do at home. Then a studio was not very incredible experience because we had to fight [through] the system, on the system of Italy. The producer was the same that takes out a lot of [inaudible]. It was not a great experience, but it was great because from that I understand that I have to run away from that kind of closed stuff. So I start to work for myself and I take first a little 8-track and the first mixer. I start with a little studio. Then I change something every year. And I come big now, I have a board. Very big, 64-channel. All at home, I don’t sell the studio to anyone. This is great. Everything is great if you don’t need to live to eat from the music. Everything. Because it’s something that is very dangerous, you know, because you have to run on yourself. If you need to eat from your work, after some time, you put the shit on the music. [applause] This is nothing great because if you are lucky and you rich, it’s possible you do what you want. If not, you have to run. You have to fight. You have to find the way. If your energy is right, “I think it’s not now, I think it’s not next month, I think it’s not… but next year maybe. Or two years.” And it comes out, anyway. Emma Warren We had an interesting question yesterday. The guy [Lars Bartkuhn] who runs the Needs Not Wants label in Frankfurt was here and was playing a load of records that inspired him plus records he produces himself. Someone asked him, “Can you make a living from music?” And he said, “No, of course I can’t. I have a day job.” For him it was so obvious that he couldn’t make music just from putting out these very beautiful, lovely records and that he needed to do something else. Did you find that production and actually making music was something else for you, that this would allow you to just do music? Claudio Rispoli Yeah, in a way we’re talking about a little... I’m talking about just for fun. Something that in Europe is running, but anyway, we don’t represent anything interesting for a big label company, because the numbers… the [labels] wait for other things. I say, it’s something for a few people, not many. It’s quality. So for the quality you work different. Emma Warren Should we play this, Brazilart? Claudio Rispoli Yeah. It’s very, very old. Emma Warren So this is from when you first started producing music. (music: Moz-Art presents Mysterious Traveller – “Common Destiny” / applause) Claudio Rispoli I am sorry because I remember now, in my car I have one or two tracks from the new one that maybe comes out next year. Because you asked me and I didn’t think of this. I think of just a fun thing. Emma Warren There’s a great percussive middle section to that tune. Claudio Rispoli Yeah. It was a black boy that lived in Rome that played percussion. One of the great conga players around Italy. Emma Warren Was this the kind of thing you were doing with your DJing as well? Claudio Rispoli I play with the records. The difference is there. But also with just funk, we have a section of very, very hard percussion between the sound player but also the percussion player, and the drummer. We are 11, 12 people on stage. Emma Warren I think Davide played some of this when he did a talk on Italian music, but in terms of that whole percussive thing, it would be good to have another quick blast of the “Jingle Masai” to kind of show where you were coming from. (music: Moz-Art - “Jingle Masai”) Emma Warren It’d be interesting to know what were you trying to do when you made that record. What was the music that inspired you to make a tune like that? Claudio Rispoli Not much other things, but the conga, and the way to play the instrument that I love, because the people that improvise on the conga can do something very near to the energy I like. Emma Warren Near to the energy that you’d find in a club, do you mean? Claudio Rispoli Oh, no. Energy that everywhere you are, you can move [gestures around]. Move inside. The club is okay, but you don’t need the dancefloor and the lights for moving inside. The music gives me this in the car, or at home, or anywhere, just a little power. It’s important to eat every day, no? Like eating, don’t stop hearing the music, because I say it’s a great, great thing, may be too much. If you stop hearing the music, some people have more problem with the body. Emma Warren So you’re saying as much as you need to eat every day to stay physically well, you need to listen to the music and keep listening to music. Claudio Rispoli You don’t have to stop listening to music, because it makes you in a good way. The music is very free feeling. Emma Warren What kind of music makes you feel like that now? Claudio Rispoli Every different moment I hear something different. I go home, I want to relax and I put, I don’t know, some jazzy thing, but not standard. I like the contamination. Good things in quality. The best is the DJ with the influence so that the musician… and also something Japanese, for example. Every time is a different moment in music. What is important is that you don’t stop hearing music, because I have four kids. The oldest is 25 years old and the little girl is five years old. One is 25, one is 22, one is 13, and the little one. So you have the possibility to stop hearing music because you have also other problems, but for me it’s so important, and also for them because if I feel good everybody feel good at home. Emma Warren I think after that whole cosmic period finished, you still were very much involved with people from the dance music that was contemporary at the time. You started Jestofunk with CeCe Rogers. Claudio Rispoli I started Jestofunk with two DJs who were friends with me. CeCe Rogers came out when we made the second single, because we made this single with a sample, and this sample was an English singer. We had a problem, of course, because he’s a voice of a people that you put up. We called CeCe because he did some records that we love. It was house music, but we loved the way he’s very near also the old style of music. Emma Warren You’re talking about records like “Someday.” Those are the records that you love to... Claudio Rispoli Exactly, straight. Emma Warren You love that really soulful, American house style that was happening in the late ‘80s, and you called him up specifically. Claudio Rispoli Yeah. Then we find that we are stupid [in] the same [way]. We have a great moment together with CeCe, because CeCe is a young mind, he never stops playing. Also, now we don’t work together, but this summer we do a little tour, like Vienna, two gigs in Switzerland. We had the two new boys, there’s one boy and one girl, black, who sing the whole time. It was great, because now he has a track in Italy that he didn’t do with us. It’s a very easy track that is running on all the radio. Emma Warren CeCe just had a hit in Italy at the moment? Claudio Rispoli Yeah it’s not directly him, he’s a DJ. Disc jockey. [Audience member shouts out the name of the track] Emma Warren What was that? Claudio Rispoli He has a record with this guy and sometimes he comes in Italy because of all the radio play. He called me and we are in concert. Emma Warren In later Jestofunk albums you work with Jocelyn Brown and other singers. Obviously she comes from the disco and soul era. Claudio Rispoli It’s very hard to work like this because you can imagine, Jocelyn Brown, she’s a very big singer, but for her, you know, it’s easy. We make a good thing, but we work [only for] one day. In one day in studio you can do good, but anyway you have to [leave]. I don’t think you can put up the great composition [in one day], but a good song anyway. Emma Warren What about more current Jestofunk stuff? Do you have any other great singers like that? Claudio Rispoli Yeah, the [voice] of Black Uhuru was Freddie McGregor, he’s the Rasta guy. He comes to make a song on the second album and some other. Emma Warren Obviously you’ve had a lot of good people with Jestofunk in the past. What about now? Do you have any plans to bring over new, different singers into the band? Claudio Rispoli Yeah, we are all the time open to new contact. It’s hard to find what we like because seeing that kind of music is not very easy. You need a very big background in school, I think, and maybe for this, the people that comes to sing with us, they are black, you know – because they are in the culture. It’s no problem, if I find [something] I think I like. There’s a lot of people, like Gino Vannelli, for example, that I love. They sing. We are open. Now we have one girl that’s living in Rome that sings with us. Also the track by CeCe Rogers is her track. She sings very good. A black guy, he’s 50 years old, and he comes from rhythm and blues, this stuff. Emma Warren As a band, Jestofunk, you’re still touring and you’re still making records. We haven’t got any Jestofunk tunes to play today, unfortunately. Claudio Rispoli I’m sorry, it’s my fault. Emma Warren No, it’s OK. It’s OK. When can we expect the next release? When will the next Jestofunk music be released? Claudio Rispoli I can’t tell you. I can’t tell you because I finish... I work in the studio for 15 years and the studio has [become] very broken. Very deep and very dirty, because we use the studio like we live, like we sleep, like we eat. I don’t say to my friend, “Don’t smoke.” And after 15 years’ work I have to... [waves arms] Emma Warren You need to clear out. Claudio Rispoli Cut away, clear away all the cable, and I don’t remember how much they were but now I know. I do everything one more time, so now it’s one month [since] I finish and I find I don’t go, just because it’s new and it’s close. I find a good way to go, because there’s long periods to relax. Stop, just hear the music, and don’t produce anything. Also because we’re going around like in August, July, and we have to go now in January. I hope to go in Germany after January. Fast, because I think you can play good that part. Emma Warren So you have the clearout and more music will come. Well, before we wind up it’d be good, because as I mentioned everybody here is kind of a DJ or producer, or they’re running labels, or they’re running clubs or they’re working on the radio – what would be your one single piece of advice? Your best tip that you would pass onto people who are at the very beginnings of their careers in music? Claudio Rispoli Do one more time. Emma Warren I’m waiting for the airplane to go. (Plane noise overhead) My question was, simply, that a lot of the people here are at beginnings of possible or probable careers or lifetimes being involved in music, whether it’s DJing, or running clubs, or making records. What would be the one thing that you would say to people? What would be your best piece of advice? Claudio Rispoli Don’t care. [Applause] Because if you think that there’s something that they don’t give you, you are done. You just take because, I tell you before, if it’s flower, flower comes out. It’s art, maybe you have something to give, maybe not. For making [art], I think you need long time. If not after two days, I don’t know exactly… because the real artist they have to take what is of them after the story is running. You have to fight. You have to live your dimension and it’s not just dream and cake. It’s also a deep thing, bad thing, and you fight yourself like all the people. Maybe an artist has more problems, because you can go deeper. What is important is, don’t care – because if you have something, that something comes out. Claudio Rispoli So you’re saying, if it’s there it’s going to come out and you’ve got to just keep doing it? OK. Well do we have any questions? I’ve got a question over here. Audience Member I want to start my question as maybe a small compliment, because the thing that you were doing with Jestofunk in middle of ’90s is the thing that really got me started on this kind of music. It was called, at that time, acid jazz. Now, lots of people are talking that acid jazz is dead. Some people are saying it has evolved in some other styles in jazz, and you are one of the best bands in this kind of music. What do you think? Is it really dead, or it has evolved? What do you call your music now? Claudio Rispoli Is that the name? Audience Member It’s just a name. Claudio Rispoli Is that the name? It’s like what they do in the football. The music is something that you can close with a name. It’s something you can give at the finish, of course. “Acid jazz” was what a newspaper or what some DJ [said]. For what I think I suggest is a great label company that when you are in Italy you think they go crazy. They make funny. They make good. Then you go in London, you see what it is and you understand that they are very little. Maybe it is dead because now the people that do acid jazz have more works and a new DJ and different… Is Bar Rumba in London, a club like this? Emma Warren Bar Rumba, yes. Yes, yes, yes. That’s still going strong. Claudio Rispoli So I don’t think it’s dead. Emma Warren That’s it. We’re flying the flag. Audience Member What about Bar Rumba? Claudio Rispoli The people that work there was the people that started the label Acid Jazz. Emma Warren It’s Gilles Peterson’s regular Monday night in London. Claudio Rispoli The other guy was ... Help me. Long hair. Emma Warren I can’t remember. It’s Gilles Peterson and someone else [Eddie Piller]. His name’s gone from me as well. Did we have another question over here somewhere? Audience Member What’s the equipment you’re working with? What do you have at home? What is in your studio? Claudio Rispoli I have, I tell you, a board. The mixer is [inaudible], from England. I buy old, old mixers. I think they do in Italy a lot of traditional music on that mixer. I love [inaudible] system, everything. I have the analogue machine, old 16-track on two inches. The machine can run on the older Atari system, because I love it for the MIDI, and on the Macintosh for the Pro Tools. I buy the new 192, the double one, and I have a 16-track digital. On the mixer I have the first 16 of analogue tape, then the second 16 are digital, and then all the MIDI situation. Emma Warren If you were saying to someone a good piece of equipment to start with that’s kind of cheap, it’s accessible, it’s kind of easy to use, what sort of thing would you suggest? Claudio Rispoli I think you can do music and pay nothing now as well. Everything is working. Audience Member Excuse me. You said you’re using tape. Does that mean you’re using reel to reel? You said you’re using old mixers. Claudio Rispoli Old tape? Audience Member Yeah. Claudio Rispoli Have you tried to record the...? Audience Member Yeah, I’ve actually been in a studio with old reel to reel. It’s very difficult. Claudio Rispoli The only way to make a good drum. Audience Member Ah, that’s true. Claudio Rispoli Because if you do the drums in digital, your compression is very [imitates the sound of drums] The analogue machine is particular for that sound gives only air. The compression. It’s very important, the mic. Audience Member What mics are you using in your studio? Claudio Rispoli I can also use cheaper things like the Shure 57, you can put it everywhere. For particular things, the bass drum is important. Audience Member What mics, for example, are you using for the congas or something like that? Claudio Rispoli On congas? Audience Member Yeah. Claudio Rispoli I love the Sennheiser 221. The black old one. The very old one. Audience Member You use a lot of live players in your studio? Is that correct? Claudio Rispoli What? Audience Member Do you have a lot of people playing live instruments in your studio? Claudio Rispoli Not much. Not together anyway. Not together, no. Audience Member You will use a live bass? For example, the drums you probably definitely prefer to record live, no? The bass, for example... Claudio Rispoli Not always. It’s very hard to make the drum. I think if you want to make the drums live in the studio, you need, first, a fucking drummer. This is very important. The people that play very good drums are smiling so much. If you recall, for example, the first record of Elio e le Storie Tese, the first record they did, he was one of the great drummers in Germany and he played in the group Passport for a long time. Nobody knows that the drummer of Elio e le Storie Tese was the drummer of Passport. It’s important [that they are] professional. He comes and he gives you the sound, but the sound is okay. I don’t have a problem to say, “Oh, the bass drum has…” [imitates sound], a very long resonance, you know? Audience Member Yeah, I heard that. That was great. Claudio Rispoli This is a problem that you can find everywhere, so this musician that comes and only thing he’s ready for playing. Audience Member In your new record that’s coming out next year, is there something exciting in there that you’re using that makes it different from the old records you produced before? Claudio Rispoli It’s long time I work with the samples, I tell you. Audience Member I see. What are you sampling? For example, do you source different sounds? Do you have a library of sounds? Claudio Rispoli I can mix also five drums together and take just the fragments that are interesting from each one. It’s possible from one sample I cut all the bass. In the part of the bass I cut the high. Audience Member How much time do you spend making a track? Claudio Rispoli How much? Audience Member Time would you spend making or working? Claudio Rispoli Oh, I don’t care. Audience Member It doesn’t matter. Are you always... Claudio Rispoli To make a good kid, you need nine months. I don’t say it’s the same. [Laughter] I think you have to work. You have to work. I say the first thing that comes… it’s impossible [that] it’s all the time genius. Audience Member How long have you worked on your new album for? Did it take you nine months? Claudio Rispoli I don’t know exactly because I have to change something in my system because the new system has a lot of possibility. The new Pro Tools, the 6.4, is an incredible thing, and maybe you lose time if you go on the sampler because it’s so straight tone and you stretch it easily. You do the stretch on the track like what you understand is the rhythm in question. Usually I do this editing myself and with the Akai. I work a lot with Akai because they have a good filter and it’s a good sampler. Audience Member Which Akai is that? Claudio Rispoli Oh, I have also a very old one. I have also 3S950. I have two 3000, and I have a big 1100 with maximum expansion and all the digital ports. Audience Member I’m so glad that you mentioned the Elio e le Storie Tese. That in my opinion is one of the greatest bands ever that came from Italy. I would like to know how do you feel about the current situation about Italian music? Abroad, Italian music has a big showcase called Festival de Sanremo. Claudio Rispoli I tell to them to do something. [laughs] Audience Member As far as I have seen in the Festival de Sanremo, the real good Italian artists are not represented. They’re not there. Only new artists that come out of nowhere. How do you feel about the current situation in Italian music? What do you think for the future in Italian music? Claudio Rispoli I don’t care. [Laughter] It’s not my problem. My little problem is what they think of us, because Sanremo ran everywhere. I ask myself what they think of us. Because it’s not true, it’s not true that they represent the music of Italy. It’s not true. Anyway, it’s a business you say, no? It’s a business. I think if you go in the States you understand that Italian people that live there represent a big business for a kind of music like... If you don’t know, I tell you, that in Italy they don’t produce music, the big label companies from Italy, they don’t produce music in English. You know what I mean? Anyway, we have a great artist. You know this. Also the great artist, we have [inaudible], who for me was one of the best. There’s no limit. He tried to sing in English and this is a problem. Audience Member They’re great. Claudio Rispoli Yeah, but Elio e le Storie Tese I can’t take seriously, because they don’t want that I take it seriously. They run on what they say. I’m sure that he don’t play to make a musician. He likes to take himself stupid [not seriously]. You have to understand what they say. [Speaks Italian] Audience Member [Replies in Italian] Claudio Rispoli No, no, not exactly. You need to make a long study to understand what he say. Audience Member I know, I know. This is repetitive. Claudio Rispoli You kept talking about [names Italian artist]. Maybe he’s more serious. Audience Member Excuse me please. Could you tell me how are you going to meet your old years? When you are very old, will you still DJ? Claudio Rispoli I think what you see is what I am. My life is running in a way that is impossible to change. I’m not a slave of anything now, like before. It’s normal that some things change and you need to find something that gives you emotion, also for playing yourself, also making it interesting to sing. If not, you don’t go anywhere. But what I am is what I am. What I am in ten years? I don’t know because I don’t ask myself to live so much before. I’m strong. Emma Warren Excellent, so do we have any more questions? We have one here. Audience Member One question. Why do you think nothing changed in the Italian music market between Baia Degli Angeli and now? There is the same situation for the market. Claudio Rispoli No, I am talking about the business. Audience Member Yeah, the business. Like [names Italian artists] and a lot of good guys that are producing good music and it doesn’t come out. The label doesn’t send them to Europe or out of Europe. Claudio Rispoli Now is a problem. Now is a big problem. Now there are not many possibilities. One of the problems comes from things like internet, like this kind of thing. The people that sell the records find another way to take up money. They say, “Oh, we don’t sell any more CDs or records. What do we do?” I tell you exactly what I hear in my stuff, directly. They have the record that is [doing well] in the radio. The problem is, you know, when the Baia was in its big moment, it was not everywhere like this. It was only that that club. In that sense I say nothing changed. Audience Member There was tickets around all Italy. I remember the stickers of Baia Degli Angeli since I was young. I was working in my city and saw in every corner the stickers. It was a very big event in Italy, and everyone knows about [it]. If they’re invested in the right way, they can change, make it popular. Also for the selling of the LPs. They didn’t do it. They didn’t do it in the past, they don’t do now. Why? Claudio Rispoli You’re talking about Baia? No. Nowadays, they don’t know what they have, in the end. They don’t care about this. There’s people that is the same, they have a hotel or... It’s a business, so they don’t care about what was Baia. They care about the way to put 3,000 people inside. Just that. If they ask, “You want to come to make a night?” I say, “Fuck you.” If Daniele say, “There is one big party, one time here.” I say, “I go,” because I don’t care. I feel good and I know that everything is okay. I don’t like so much the people, because it’s not exactly… Emma Warren It’s a tricky situation. I think that might wrap it up unless there’s anything else anyone would like to ask Claudio. In which case we should just say, thank you very much. Claudio Rispoli You’re welcome.

---

Title: Bobbito Garcia
Date: 2017-10-04
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/bobbito-garcia/

Bobbito Garcia
Bobbito Garcia is a radio host, filmmaker and basketball enthusiast whose voice and passion guided an entire generation. As one half of the Stretch Armstrong & Bobbito Show, broadcasted out of Columbia University’s WKCR weekly between 1990 and 1998, Bobbito helped to launch the careers of hip-hop legends like Nas, the Notorious B.I.G., Jay Z and Big Pun. But while the man also known as Kool Bob Love is often remembered for his contributions to hip-hop culture, his reputation goes beyond: He has also served eminently behind the scenes, via his vinyl-only imprint Álala Records, as a b-ball pro for ESPN, and most recently as a documentary maker and producer.
On the couch of the Red Bull Music Academy Session in Plovdiv, the indefatigable New Yorker retraces a life of hoop dreams, music discoveries and new learnings.
Hosted by Bobbito Garcia One-two, how you all feel out there? [Whoops from audience] Julian Brimmers When I said that you are one of the premier storytellers in many fields – you’re a DJ, a filmmaker, a journalist, a writer, you design streetwear, and one of the prime sneaker ads of your days – how do you do all these things without having a cellphone? [Laughter] Bobbito Garcia Well, I do now have a cellphone. I have a child, I’m married — my wife put the hammer down when our son was able to walk and I started taking him to the playground, and she said, “You know what Bob, all that ‘no cellphone’ is cute, but you’re getting a cellphone,” and as any married people here know, when your wife talks, you gotta listen [laughs]. So I now have a cellphone but I haven’t really let it change my culture of communication, and I always remind people that human beings did very well without telecommunications for hundreds of thousands of years. It’s really a recent phenomenon, in the last century, and cellphone use is less than two decades deep, so we’re very capable of making plans and planning ahead and organizing so that we stay in contact with people and we’re present, and that was my reason for not having a cellphone for a long time. I was finding that while people were able to communicate more, they were communicating less in an intimate setting. But I have used the cellphone to my advantage, and my Instagram following now is at 30,000 [laughs] since getting a cellphone, so there are some advantages. Julian Brimmers And besides being new to the cellphone family, to the 21st century, you left New York very recently. How does that feel for someone who’s spent quite a few decades in the Big Apple? Bobbito Garcia I have not spoken about this publicly, so thank you for putting it on blast [laughs] but that’s fine, we’re not avoiding any questions today. Stretch Armstrong, how many of you are familiar with him? Alright, cool, so we did a documentary titled Stretch and Bobbito Radio Change Lives, it’s available here in Bulgaria on Netflix, it’s available in 192 countries. The success of that film led to National Public Radio in the United States approaching us about doing a new podcast. We hadn’t done radio on a regular basis since 1998 when we parted ways. NPR’s headquarters are based in D.C. My wife was born and raised there and we have a three year old who is very energetic and likes to run around, and we just decided as a family to make the move to explore the potential for what the platform could be, but also to just switch up the environment. Being 50 years old and having checked off everything on my bucket list for life goals, I felt like, “You know what, I’ve lived a complete and full life in New York, it’s OK if I make a change.” At age 25 I would’ve never done that, but at age 50 we can invite that, and it’s been great. And D.C. is close to New York so I’m up there every single week [laughs]. Julian Brimmers So maybe we can listen to a track that will kind of bring us back to Harlem and back to New York real quick? Bobbito Garcia Let’s go for it. (music: Elenita Ruiz Con Conjunto – “Ya Nada Me Importa”) Y’all give a round of applause for that song? That was my father playing vibraphone on that song. Julian Brimmers And that’s the only recording that can be found of his? Bobbito Garcia Well, that can’t even be found. So a little background, the artist is Elenita Ruiz, and I don’t know much about it at all. My father was a Latin jazz Musician who performed at the Palladium, he did some community centers and weddings with a little band called Ramon Garcia Y Su Conjunto. I knew that he had done some songwriting, and he had a lot of jams at the house growing up, but it wasn’t until after he passed — he passed away 20 years ago, in 1997 — that one of his musician friends hit me up, some years afterwards, and he was like, “Hey, Bobby, come over to the house, I just found something.” I was like, “Great.” He lived in the neighborhood and I stopped by. William Hernandez — he was a flute player in my father’s band. He said, “Here, this is for you, I think you should have it.” And I looked at the 7” – it’s old, from the early ‘60s — and I wasn’t familiar with the artist, wasn’t familiar with the label, and he said, “Your father played vibes on that,” and I was just blown away. Upon listening to it, I obviously got emotional because he was no longer with us. So, I spoke to some of my family members. They were unaware of the song as well. Then in 2009, myself and one of my best friends, Rich Medina, we did a compilation for a label called R2 in London, in the UK, called The Connection. It was modern explorations in Afro-Latin and Afrobeat. That was one of the songs that we included on the compilation, on my side — we did a double CD. The licensing supervisor could not find the master or publishing owner for the song, it’s that rare. I don’t believe that the singer is even alive anymore, so it’s unfortunate that I can’t find out more about that song. It speaks volumes to me just hearing it now. I’ve played it in sets but never at the height of the night, usually really early on when nobody’s in the room, so this is the first time I’m hearing it with the community, and it’s beautiful. It’s a beautiful song. I hope you all enjoyed that. [Applause] Julian Brimmers Thanks for sharing with us, that song and that story. Is it fair to think that might be the music that was all around you while growing up? Was it Latin music, or what was the soundtrack to your upbringing? Bobbito Garcia Well, yes, I was very fortunate and not fortunate, in that my father was a musician, so I was exposed to some of the very greats of Latin jazz in my house. Many of whom I had no idea they were as famous as they were, or as accomplished. Most notably, a tenor saxophone player by the name of Chombo Silva, who played with Cal Tjader, Mongo Santamaria, and recorded some of his own albums as a band. He was from Cuba and moved to the States in the ‘50s. He just took over, he was the prominent tenor sax in Latin Jazz. [But I was] four years old, five years old, I wanted to watch cartoons in the morning on a Saturday and these guys were just jamming out — and not Saturday morning because they just got together, but like Friday night going into Saturday morning, you know?! I couldn’t really appreciate it as a child, I didn’t have a sophisticated enough ear. It wasn’t really until I got to my adulthood, and a lot of thanks to hip-hop. Because if you’re ahead, especially in the ‘90s where we were really going deep with sampling, a lot of us started to dig a little bit deeper — what is this foundation music that’s feeding all this incredible rap music? So we started digging for soul, funk, jazz, disco, world music, African music, Latin music. It was at that moment that I got so intrigued and fascinated by the music from before, that I started really diving into Latin music, maybe more so than other DJs that I know, because, you know, I’m Puerto Rican. And discovering that Ray Barretto had been to my house, and Joe Bataan had been to my house, and that my brother studied under Charlie Palmieri… and, I mean, once the floodgate opened and my mom — because my father was no longer around — started telling me who had visited the house and played, it was like, holy fucking shit! One thing I did know about my dad is that he opened up for Tito Puente, who is the foremost Latin musician of all time. I mean, 100 albums recorded… there may be singers who have sold more records, but I’m just talking about in terms of critical acclaim and really pushing the envelope and just being so creative. Tito Puente is the top of the food chain, and my father really looked up to him and opened up for him at the Paladium, which was the biggest club for Latin music in the world in the ‘50s and ‘60s. That was a huge deal to our family. My father, years later until his death, that was his shining moment. And it wasn’t really the biggest shine, it wasn’t like he was the headliner, he was just the opening act. But that was a big deal for him and we were all very proud of his moment. A lot of this stuff I will go into deeper detail in my next film, it’s titled Rock Rubber 45s. It’s in production right now, it’ll be out in 2018. If you enjoyed my first film, Doin’ it in the Park, or my second film, Stretch and Bobbito, I hope that you keep an open mind and keep it on your radar for Rock Rubber 45s. Hopefully maybe Red Bull can bring me back out and we’ll do the screening and Q&A for it and everything. Shameless plug for all you people online. Julian Brimmers Fair enough. So what was the first music that you felt was yours? ‘Cause growing up in a musical household, there’s their music, and you might enjoy it, but there needs to be some form of rebellion where you have your own [moment of] “That’s my shit, you don’t understand this.” What was it and how did you find it? Bobbito Garcia That’s a great question, and it’s never been posed quite in that manner, so I appreciate your line of thinking. My father, while he was very proud to be Puerto Rican, and my mom was born in PR and moved to New York, they both were incredibly open-minded individuals and I’m thankful for that. They both listened to Frank Sinatra, Tony Bennett, Natalie Cole, Dinah Washington, opera, classical music, Tchaikovsky, Pavarotti. You name it, there was so much music in the house. When I was seven, I had a moment in the living room to myself. My father had played Stevie Wonder quite often in the house, and it was the first time I was going to select a song myself without my brothers telling me, “Shut that shit off,” or whatever [laughs]. And I pulled out Innervisions. That’s the first album that I ever played and listened to — Side A, Side B, all the tracks — on my own. If you’re familiar with that album, imagine that being your introduction to the LP format. I was blown away. So I claimed that. Stevie Wonder really spoke to me. And then the next sort of movement that I was able to really claim was my introduction into hip-hop. Understand that in the ‘70s, no one called it hip-hop. We didn’t know there was going to be this global force that would sustain for decades and impact the world. It was just something that we just, you know, you played basketball, you played tag, you played football, and you listened to music with your friends and you danced and you rhymed, and it was just part of the daily experience. When I got involved in that, it really hit a chord with me that was unlike soul music and unlike Latin music and unlike anything else I had heard. It was fun, it was really, really fun. Even sonically, I remember the first time my friend Timmy Fobbs, on the 12th floor of my building, played Trans-Europe Express by Kraftwerk. We went into his bedroom and he was like “Yo, I’ve got this new record, I want you all to check it out,” and we were playing electronic football. I don’t know how old all of you are, but there used to be this board and you’d plug it in, and the board would vibrate and the little football men would go, but they would never go straight — it was a pointless game, they would always go out of bounds, you could never win, you could never even play it! It was just a shitty electronic game [laughs] I’m digressing. But he played Kraftwerk and we all sat there in 1977 with our jaws open like, “What the f…” You’ve got to think, a lot of stuff that we just assume and take for granted… It was mind-blowing to be introduced to this. Mind-blowing. And then to hear it on warm analog vinyl, too. It was great. Julian Brimmers Did you understand that it was sampled by others? Did you understand at the time? Bobbito Garcia It wasn’t sampled yet! Julian Brimmers No, no but shortly after, when the first records came in that used these other records, when Soulsonic Force came in. Did you understand that connection? Bobbito Garcia I did not see the continuity at the time. It’s really when I became a journalist and a critic, an advocate and evangelist and… someone who was almost like an ambassador, in the ‘90s, that I was able to look back and be like, “Oh yeah, Bambaataa, Arthur Baker, they were using these electronic sounds.” At the time when Tommy Boy [Records] was releasing all that music, we were just enjoying it. No one was really trying to critique it. It was just like, “Aw man, this is a jam, let’s dance to it!” You know? I wasn’t like, “Oh man, I hear it, I hear the sample — that’s the snare drum from 1978!” You know, we weren’t nerds yet. We became nerds in the ‘90s. At least I did. Julian Brimmers So I assume that you split your time between being on the court, as someone who had high hopes for a sports career as well, and being with music friends, talking about music a lot. What was the power ranking back then? Was basketball more important for the time? Bobbito Garcia So there was no split. Let me make it clear. I played ball as a kid every day. That was my complete existence. From 1980 to 1988, I only missed three days of playing basketball. [Audience laughter] That’s it. And I know that for a fact because those three days I was actually sick. Holidays I hated, because the gym would be closed, so that meant I had to sneak in the gym or I had to play outside in the cold, which was fine. But I had lofty goals of playing professionally and I was very driven, and I was immersed in this basketball culture, so I wasn’t going to clubs back then. I wasn’t DJing back then, I wasn’t a radio host. It all comes later in the ‘90s — in the ‘80s it’s all about basketball. Anything that revolved around hip-hop and music was a byproduct of that. Like, OK, we’re at the court, they’re playing Treacherous Three’s “Body Rock” during half-time and before the game. “Wow! That song is incredible.” OK, we just went to camp in Spanish Harlem, gotta go get lunch before we gonna go back out to the park and play again, we’re eatin’ lunch. “Yo! Did you hear the Grandmaster Flash? Yo, let me get a dub!” It was like the music conversations were byproducts, the basketball was the thread of the day. That was my experience. You know, there are people whose entire existence was hip-hop and basketball was the backdrop. They were a fan of the Knicks. I wasn’t a fan, I was an active participant of basketball. I started coaching basketball when I was 15. Julian Brimmers More time in the gym. Bobbito Garcia Yeah, gym and outdoors. And it paid off. I played professional basketball in Puerto Rico in 1987, and that’s a career highlight for me amongst many that came years later, but that one I really, really worked hard to get. And I had no business playing professional basketball. Julian Brimmers So, fill in the gap for us — you played professional basketball in Puerto Rico, but you also shortly after got involved in the music biz, working for Def Jam. What happened? Bobbito Garcia I went to Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut, from 1984 to 1988. Between my junior and senior year that’s when I played professional basketball. And I returned to school, finished my studies, graduated, and… Let me backtrack. A year prior to that I started hanging out with two artists by the name of MC Serch and Prime Minister Pete Nice, who wound up becoming the group 3rd Bass, got signed to Def Jam. We just did a lot of things together. You know, we hung out, we all played ball, I used to give Serch haircuts, I would go to shows with them, I was dancing for them at one point. And one day Serch and Pete hit me up like, “Yo, there’s a job opening at Def Jam as a messenger,” and I just went with it. You know, I had a sense when I graduated from college that I wasn’t gonna be an all-star in Puerto Rico, I wasn’t gonna make the national team. I was very honest with myself. Sure, maybe I could’ve went back and played, and played more, and maybe had an impact there, but I didn’t really see that happening, although I was still curious about it. But shit, I’m in New York, it’s the mecca of basketball. Can’t stop me from playing, I’m playing tournaments. So I had that for the fix, for the jones, like, oh, I could play ball every single day. I’m still playing ball every day. I’m not getting paid for it, but who cares? I already got paid for it. I know what that feels like. Let me challenge myself and do something else, and I had a sense that maybe there was something in the music industry for me to pursue and it paid off. You know I got a job at Def Jam in ‘89 and I moved up the ladder very quickly there, ‘cause I was super hard-working and passionate about the label and what they represented. I mean, fuck — we had Public Enemy, LL Cool J, 3rd Bass, and Slick Rick. Are you shitting me? It was like the five biggest… and the Beastie Boys had come out prior to that, even though they weren’t on the label anymore. W’re talking about the prominent label, not just of the year, the decade. You know? And opportunities worked, it was priceless. And I milked that for all that I could. Julian Brimmers And it’s also where you met Stretch Armstrong for the first time, in the offices over there. Bobbito Garcia So Stretch Armstrong and I met at Def Jam. He came by to pick out some records and we hit it off immediately. It was so instantaneous. We wound up starting a radio show in 1990 and, you know, eight years later we look back and all these unsigned artists that came through our doors wound up changing the face of… forget rap, I’m talking about music industry period. Julian Brimmers Let’s do a quick roll call maybe? Bobbito Garcia Yeah. Nas, Biggie, Wu-Tang, Mobb Deep — Prodigy, rest in peace. Big Pun, rest in peace. Big L, rest in peace. Eminem, Jay-Z. Those were the unsigned artists that came through our doors, and there were a ton of artists who were signed like The Fugees and Cypress Hill, who had no props until they came through our doors and then, you know, their careers started changing after that. So we were fortunate that we were in a position to highly influence our audience with our tastes and also highly influence artists and musicians with their tastes. Because once the light bulb went in people’s head, that, “Oh, man — if I make this song and it’s experimental, there’s a home for it to be heard.” Right? So that opened up the door for people to branch out. So we had a great run and it’s documented in the film Stretch & Bobbito: Radio That Changed Lives. And the reason it’s titled that is because it was transformative for myself and Stretch, for the artists as well, but really for our listeners. And so there’s three narratives in the film. We interviewed the common person that none of you know, because to me, as the director and writer of the film, it was just as important to hear what people went through to listen to our show in an age where it was not accessible. Completely different to now, where everything’s accessible so long as you have wi-fi. So yeah, it was an amazing project to be a part of. Julian Brimmers And you really had to search for it. You had to know where to find it. We’re talking about dialing in. Bobbito Garcia Yeah. And if you missed it you had to ask a friend to tape it for you, and if you lived outside of the radio signal you had to hope that… I mean, I knew people from France that would fly into New York just to tape our show, and then go back and bootleg our show to sell it. And our show got bootlegged all around the world. Which, when we found out about, we weren’t completely too mad about, because it brought our names to cities we had never gone to, but also we were in it to share the very best music that was available in hip-hop, and by virtue of the bootlegging, it helped a lot of artists that were getting played on our show that weren’t getting heard otherwise. That helped create a platform that some artists from the ‘90s are still living off today. There are artists that are still touring and still doing shows that came through our show and got known through the tape circuit. This is pre-internet, so it’s a beautiful thing. Julian Brimmers Did that come in handy while producing the film? The fact that all over the world people might have bootlegs? Because I assume you couldn’t have that running all the time, you must have forgotten to record some of things. Bobbito Garcia We did, we did. Recently Prodigy from Mobb Deep passed away, a big loss to the hip-hop community, but the first time he came up with Havoc was April 1st, 1991, when they were unsigned. They were a group called Poetical Prophets. Four years later they splashed as Mobb Deep with their album, went platinum and everything, but we didn’t record that night. The first night Biggie came up as an unsigned artist, in ‘91, we didn’t record that night. It’s like, we didn’t know these guys were going to become who they became! If we knew, we would have had two cameras up there, we would have hired the two of you, because you’re so handsome, and we would have weekly recorded video and audio — but we didn’t. We were just trying to play the best artists that were out, whether they were signed or not, and it was years later that we were like, “Holy shit, Nas just blew the fuck up — we should have filmed that!” But, yeah, there were definitely some nights that were not filmed. The Biggie night we actually wound up finding the audio of when we made the film, so for those of you who saw it, that was the first time Stretch and I had heard that freestyle since it was performed live in our studio. It’s a highlight of the film for a lot of people. Julian Brimmers We actually have that cued up, we have the freestyle cued up, so we can play that — that’s track four, that’s the audio from the actual movie, so you’ll hear a little bit in the beginning and at the end, just to hear a 16-year-old Biggie. (music: Biggie Smalls demo tape, The Stretch & Bobbito Show, 1991) Julian Brimmers That’s a whole lot of cursing for a 16 year old. [Audience laughter] Bobbito Garcia He was actually 17 at the time. That was a little fact-check that we found out after the interview. But props to 50 Grand, his original DJ, who produced that demo. He produced Biggie’s demo, but he was also the only person that we’ve found that actually recorded that night that Biggie came up as an unsigned artist. For those of you who don’t know, Biggie wound up becoming, him and Tupac, the premier artists of the ‘90s. His second album sold 10 million copies, the first hip-hop artist to ever sell that many copies, so he’s very large in the history. We were just in the right place at the right time with the right open mind to have invited him up. Julian Brimmers The craziest thing is he came in at 16, or 17, and already had the flow locked down, the Biggie flow, it was already there. That’s the craziest part. People forget how young they [Biggie and Tupac] were when they passed away, both of them. So, with Biggie, the story behind that is pretty crazy, right? He didn’t get rejected, but he lost the demo battle or something? He sent in a demo and it lost against another group, Brooklyn Zoo? Bobbito Garcia Bronx Zoo. So, what we used to do on our radio show was, because we wanted to play the very best music and have the very best MCs, unsigned or signed, on our show, we used to invite people to mail in their songs. It didn’t matter to us whether they were signed or not, so we had Bronx Zoo and we had Biggie’s demo and we played them against each other and we would just open up the phone lines and be like, “Yo, call in and vote for the best demo of the night.” And Bronx Zoo won. But I think Biggie, in the long run, won a little more. Maybe a lot more. [Laughs] Julian Brimmers Shout out Bronx Zoo, wherever you may be. Bobbito Garcia Hey, I liked their demo, you know? Biggie was pissed off that they beat him, so that’s why he came up and he was like, “I want to set the record straight.” He actually wanted to battle them live in the studio, that’s why he came up there. I mean, artists used to come up to our show very focused. You know how before a basketball game, when the team is with the coach in the locker room and they’re like [closes eyes and shakes head in concentration] That’s how artists would come up to our station, you know? Because they knew that the world was going to hear them, and for some of them who were unsigned, that was everything to them. They didn’t know that they would get signed so they really took it seriously. Julian Brimmers So in retrospect, all these big names that came through, it’s quite surprising to think that that was your side hustle, right? For you and for Stretch. That was one of the things you did at the time, but it’s not like you got paid crazy money from a big broadcasting corporation. Bobbito Garcia Well, we did the show for free! I mean, it was college radio, so we invested a lot of resources to produce a weekly program that took a toll. I mean, we were on the air from 1 AM to 5 AM — that’s not an easy time slot. You go to bed at 6 AM, 6:30. How many DJs are here? I know you used to DJ. You ever do a gig and afterwards you’re on a music high, because it’s like, “Oh my god, I just heard all this incredible music.” And you go home and you take a shower and you can’t go to sleep because it’s just like the music, it’s just in you, like, “Oh my god.” Think about that, on a weekly basis. We’re hearing the most incredible MCs in the world, women and men, and you go home at 5:30, 5:45, you can’t go to sleep. We used to go home, when me and Stretch were roomies, and we would put the tape on of the show when we would get home. We’d go to bed at 6:30, 7 AM. I had a regular job, I worked at Def Jam. I had to go to work the next day, so it was taxing. It was really taxing and it hurt the most on the basketball court, because then I would go and have a game Friday night, Saturday and my body would be just, like, taxed. I would play like shit and then people knew who I was because I was on the radio. It’s not a big deal when no one knows who you are and you play like shit. When you got a court and everybody knows who you are it’s like, “Aw, man.” So, yeah, that was tough. When I retired from radio, I did not miss it. To this day, I do not miss the time slot. It was hard. Julian Brimmers Although, to be fair, when you did the reunion, the 20-year reunion of the broadcasts, you still went for the same time slot. Bobbito Garcia Yeah, well, originally I told Stretch, “I don’t want to be up until 5 AM. I’m in my forties now, I’ll stay up there until 3 AM, I promise.” And 3 AM came along and I was not cognizant of the time at all. 5 AM came along, it was like [I was] on a high, I was giddy, I felt like I was 25 years old again. 6 AM came along, like, “Can we just keep on going?” And this was completely drug free, I don’t drink, I don’t — nothing. This was just straight drinking water and being in the studio just high off of music, t he euphoria of the listeners and the artists. The radio show that we did, it meant a lot. I’m very happy that we’re going back on the air with National Public Radio in the United States with a podcast — although it’s not gonna be a music show, it’s not gonna be mix show. It will be an interview-based podcast where we go in depth, kind of like what you’re doing with me, with our guests. We’ve already recorded some and we have some phenomenal interviewees that run the gambit from politics to film to music to hip-hop to literature to the art world. A lot of people are gonna be shocked. Some people might be disappointed, actually, ‘cause they’re gonna be like “Yo, where’s the hip-hop?” But, it’s like, I’m 50 years old now. I was never solely defined by hip-hop, not even in the ‘90s. That’s what got me out into the world and I’m thankful for it, but with Stretch it’s the same thing. We have multiple interests and we’re diverse characters and we want the podcast to shine a light on all that is important to us. Julian Brimmers Were you intimidated by that? Because if you take away the music element, the radio show was always defined by the chemistry that you and Stretch had. The beautiful thing about the film that you made, the real triumph of the movie, is the restoration of that friendship, I’d say. Were you intimidated by the fact that now it’s all on us, it’s all on us and the guests? Bobbito Garcia No! No, I’m not intimidated. I’ve interviewed Stevie Wonder, Michael Jordan, Chaka Khan, Gil Scott-Heron, Isaac Hayes, Dan Marino. I’ve interviewed some of the most famous people in the world. Quincy Jones. For my film, Rock Rebel 45s, I interviewed Lin-Manuel Miranda, Tony award-winner — this dude is insanely popular globally, with Hamilton and In The Heights, and now he’s doing films with Disney. That means nothing to me, you know? You put me in front of somebody who is cool and has a story, I’m gonna talk to them the same way I would to Irina about the history of Bulgaria. I’m fortunate in that I’ve always been able to make people feel comfortable around me. As a unit, that’s what we’re doing with the podcast. We’re really getting people to open up. I can’t wait for all of you to hear it. It goes live July 19th this summer on NPR.org, as well as the NPR One app. Julian Brimmers I’d like to back up real quick and talk a bit about you as a filmmaker and the various things that you’ve evolved into. It seems that, with all respect, that you get into things without being trained for it. And then excel pretty amazingly at them, just by virtue of having the opportunity to do them and then going at it. Maybe if we can watch the video number two from your first film, Doin’ it at The Park, which you co-directed with Kevin Couliau from France. It’s little segment from that that I would like to play. So, that was Crazy Legs, a legendary B-boy from the Rock Steady Crew. You are in some way affiliated with Rock Steady Crew — did you also break at some point? Bobbito Garcia I never broke. I grew up being friends with members of the Rock Steady even before Rock Steady formed. Ken Swift and Doze, we used to play football with each other. And then I grew up in Rock Steady Park, which the basketball world called The Goat. It was named after playground legend Earl Manigault. So I used to see all the Rock Steady Crew members practising, I witnessed all that, but I wasn’t active in it. Because in the ‘80s, as I mentioned to you, my whole life was basketball. In the ‘90s when I started putting some time into being a hip-hop participant as well as activist, Legs and I, our paths were bound to cross. We met in 1991, and we hit it off immediately because we were both Puerto Rican, both had a lot of similar experiences growing up. Knew a lot of the same people. We both really wanted to see the best for the culture in the decade, and so we started collaborating on events. Early on his goal was to bring back the park jams of the ‘70s, ’cause they kind of like disappeared towards the late ‘80s. A couple of members of the crew passed away, and unfortunately some were murdered. And the Rock Steady Crew anniversary was founded to commemorate the ones who had passed, but also to try to give younger people the experience of the outdoor park jam. We started in 1991, and because of my position with the radio show I helped program it. Because any of the artists who were nice on the mic, I was like, “Yo, here’s who we should have perform.” And then Legs asked me to host it, and then it took off. I mean, by ‘94, ‘95, we had like 5,000 people from all over the world flying in to be part of the Rock Steady Crew Annual Anniversary at Rock Steady Park, aka The Goat, which is where I grew up. It was a special time. Then I started DJing towards the mid-‘90s and the late ‘90s, and Legs put me down at Rock Steady. Not because I was a dancer, but because Rock Steady is not just a dance crew, it’s an organization to advocate for all elements and the experience of hip-hop. I was a natural selection for him, ‘cause it’s also a family, too. There’s a lot of talented B-boys or B-girls out there that aren’t in Rock Steady. Rock Steady is very much about, “OK, we get along, we support each other.” So that’s how I got down back then. Julian Brimmers It really nicely ties in with what you already said, that everything happened on the playground and on the courts. It was like a whole cultural hop there, basically. What we just saw on this short sequence, coming back to you as a filmmaker, the gentleman before Crazy Legs also appears in your second film, The Stretch and Bobbito film. Bobbito Garcia Yeah, his name is Anthony Alonzo. Julian Brimmers And how do you know him? Bobbito Garcia Hosting shows with Rock Steady and [hosting] the radio show with Stretch led to me hosting events across the board. And in ‘93 I started hosting the very first showcase, which combined hip-hop, spoken word, and jazz. It was originally called Bebop and then it became known as All That, and moved to the Nuyorican Café. There I met a ton of poets, some of whom became very well known in the space. And many of whom, the first time they ever performed, I had brought them on stage. Again, this is going to be detailed with archival footage and archival photos in my next film Rock Rebel 45s. But NymFlow 9 was one of those spoken word artists. His real name is Anthony Alonso. He was one of my favorites when I was doing the Nuyorican and unfortunately, in ‘96 I believe, he got incarcerated. He was inside for 14 years and I stayed in contact with him the whole time, wrote him letters, visited him, and when he came out, as a first-time film maker I felt that perhaps there was a way to help expose his forgotten talent. ‘Cause he was part of a class in the Nuyorican that included Saul Williams, anybody heard of him? He’s like the premier spoken word dude. You know, Lemon Andersen, a Tony award-winner with Def Jam Poetry, Suheir Hammad, another Tony award-winner. Nymflow 9 was part of all these, he was their contemporary and they all had a lot of respect for him. So, I asked Anthony, “Are you still writing?” I knew he was still writing ‘cause he would write me letters from prison, some of which had contained poetry, so I felt like it was a good platform for him, ‘cause he loves basketball. I invited him and I thought he killed it. And he does a poem in the second film, Stretch and Bobbito. I don’t know that we’ll have him do a spoken word in my next film, ‘cause I don’t want to, you know — you can’t run it to the ground. But lovely dude, very different. I just wanted to give him the props that he deserved. Julian Brimmers So, the very interesting approach that you took for Doin’ It In The Park, for the history of pick-up basketball in New York City, is that you and Kevin Couliau, the director from France, just hopped on a bike and played on courts all over New York. You have a slightly similar approach for the second movie that you made, the Stretch and Bobbito movie, because once again you and a friend go on tour in NYC to meet some famous people and we have video footage of that. It really is nice to see how it transcends a well-known audio file, to see how people react. So maybe we can play the second video please? (music: Big L and Jay-Z freestyle, The Stretch & Bobbito Show, 1995) So that was very young Jigga Man when he was still with Jaz-O, going back like an oldie but a goodie — a goldie. It’s really nice to see — this is very iconic moment by now, this audio file took on a life of its own basically after the fact. You guys said before publicly that you didn’t realize at the time that you’d just witnessed some iconic moment. How could you at that time, right? So when that happened, now you have the footage to it, it seems like Jay-Z is not 100% aware that people in the common narrative think that he got a bit killed on that freestyle by Big L. Bobbito Garcia Well, I mean, that moment was not a battle. It’s been misinterpreted as one. People have surely taken sides and have an opinion about who had the better verse. Just as you would on many group cuts, like back in the ‘80s, the symphony cuts — like, where you have G-Rap and Big Daddy Kane, Craig G, and Masta Ace. And you’d be like, “Yo, who had the better verse?” “G-Rap had the better verse!” “Naw, Kane had the best verse!” That’s a long-standing tradition in hip-hop, to argue. I mean, who’s better: Lebron [James] or Michael Jordan? You know? So that’s something that is just fun and healthy for people in the community to discuss. But it was not a battle, they didn’t go up there to see who was nicer. They were just two great MCs sharing the moment. And, yeah, I think it’s unfortunate that Big L was murdered. Some people don’t know at this point that he was shot in his face on his block in front of his home, and it was just terrible news. You know, terrible news. Julian Brimmers Apparently didn’t have anything to do with street stuff, right? Bobbito Garcia I don’t know the whole story. Honestly, I don’t even want to know. But he lived in a volatile and violent community and time, and, you know, we would all have loved to have seen Big L reach his full potential as an artist. That’s never gonna happen. So as great as this freestyle was, I think what really catapulted it to the extreme stratosphere is that there’s that continual question mark about L. Like, what would he have become if he was still alive? ‘Cause look at who he’s rhyming side-by-side with, and look what he became. Jay-Z became, you know, this multi-millionaire, 75 million records sold entrepreneur, you know — just taking over so many facets of multiple industries. And L was a good businessman. A lot of people don’t realize L had a phenomenal ear. Like, you know how they put Jay-Z as the head of Def Jam at one point? L brought up Jay-Z to our radio show. L brought up Killa Cam and Murder Mase to our radio show. They wound up selling millions of records too, as Cam’ron and Mase. L was the kind of dude, like, he loved our show. He loved being on it. He loved our audience. I mean, we have the same approach with him, Finesse, anybody we liked. You didn’t come up to our show to promote an album. You came up to our show to be a part of hip-hop and express yourself. Here’s the platform. Here’s the mic. Go nuts. And that’s what L did. And that’s what Jay-Z did that night. And so it was great. It took about 18 months to get Jay-Z on camera for the film, but it was worth it, and the fact that he shared what he did was mind-blowing. Julian Brimmers The reaction of these people is really priceless. Like the concept, and the reaction, to see the reaction of these people to their own own old verses, that’s pretty priceless. It’s a pretty priceless concept. Bobbito Garcia Yeah. It was a deliberate decision to play the freestyles off cassette, to bring them back to their childhood, like when we used to play cassettes and put them in headphones and you could hear the crackle in the cassette cause it aged and some of the freestyles are like a dub of a dub, you know? That’s the only copy that exists anymore. Making both films was just so much fun. Making my next film has been a complete joy, although it’s been the most vulnerable I’ve been of the three because now because Rock Rubber 45s is going to be an autobiographical documentary, I have to give the backstory of my career. So I’m going into my childhood and my relationship with my parents and my family and things that aren’t always comfortable to share in public. I’m gonna be an open book. Julian Brimmers You’ve gone on that journey by yourself, or do you have another straight man? Bobbito Garcia Yes. Well, I mean I’m interviewing a lot of… My mom is in it and my brothers are in it and my best friend from childhood, my best friend from high school, my best friend from college, and then of course the Rosie Perezes and the Michael Rapaports and the Lin-Manuel Mirandas and the people who I’ve collaborated with professionally as well. Quincy Jones is in the film, Scottie Pippin, Charles Barkley, Patti Labelle, who was a mentor to me in high school. These are things that a lot of people don’t know about my life, but are gonna discover all these injections of really well known people who have had an effect on my life, and I’ve had an effect on them as well. Julian Brimmers And to wrap things up I wanted to ask you about the influence of Eddie Palmieri, ‘cause he’s coming back in various stages of your life, and especially in that film as well, right? Bobbito Garcia Yeah. Well, Eddie and I have a really beautiful history. In 1995 I was invited to Copenhagen, Denmark, with Stretch and we performed out there. The promoter, DJ Typhoon, wound up booking me in his country like 14 times in the next seven years. One of those bookings was Eddie Palmieri, who was on tour. First of all, let me backtrack. Eddie Palmieri has been recording albums since the 1950s. He is a treasure of Latin music. He’s won 10, or maybe 11 Grammy Awards, so we’re talking about one of the most accomplished musicians in Latin music history. Anyway, so I opened up for him there. He didn’t know who I was. I closed out afterwards, and the first song that I played after their set was “Azucar,” part two and part three, off of the Live At Sing Sing album, and one of the members of his band came up to me and was like, “What do you know about that?” He thought I was Danish. And I was like just, “Yo soy Boricua, I’m from New York.” He was like, “Oh, shit! What’re you doing out here?” I was like, “Yo, they flew me out here to do this event.” He was like, “Damn!” He was really impressed. That was like the beginning of the bond that I had with Eddie and Eddie’s band. Then, man, what year was it? I don’t recall the exact year, but I met with his lawyer/manager and they were like, “We want to redo Harlem River Drive. We would love to have you involved in it somehow.” I was like, “Yo, let me know.” Nothing happened to that. Eddie hadn’t recorded for many years, and in 2011 I was asked to be the opening DJ for his 75th birthday. At the time I was directing, writing, producing, doing In The Park, and I just kind of threw it out there. I was like, “Would you want to score the film?” Not knowing anything. Julian Brimmers As you would do, ask an 11-time Grammy winner to score your independent movie. Bobbito Garcia Yeah, yeah — “Hey, Quincy Jones, would you like to score my film? I’m a first time filmmaker doing a film with a budget of like $5, but you know…?” The thing was that he had never scored a film, he had never been asked to do one, and he really loved who I am and what I represent and what the film was gonna represent, and he jumped onboard. It turned out that he hadn’t made any original compositions in years. What I asked of him was, like, "I want you to create a vibe that is similar to your Harlem River Drive album from 1971.” That started something that none of us could’ve predicted, because he did the three songs, we put them in the film and it lit a flame underneath him and he got really inspired and he kept on composing. He has a new album out called Sabiduría, and in the process there started to become this sort of revitalization and interest in the Harlem River Drive album. Then Red Bull got behind it and funded the Harlem River Drive revisited concert. In 2016 I was again asked, it was like the fourth or fifth time I was asked to open up for Eddie Palmieri. I closed afterwards. That’s weird. The DJs here, you know what time it is. You don’t want to go after a legend. It’s like, when Eddie Palmieri’s concert is over, I feel like, just get on the mic, say thank you to everybody and say goodbye, but I’ve been asked to perform afterwards as well. I asked him to be interviewed for my film and he blew me away by what he shared. He’s a brilliant soul, provocative mind, and again I encourage all of you in 2018 to keep on your radar, the film titled Rock Rubber 45s. There will be a lot revealed in it that is gonna be mind-blowing. Julian Brimmers Perfect, and no one has seen any of it so far, except from one dude on the plane who’s sitting next to you. Bobbito Garcia Yeah. I was telling him yesterday, I taught myself how to edit on Adobe Premiere, and the beauty of modern technology is I can edit anywhere as long as I have my external hard drives. I’ve been editing on flights, but on my flight from Nice to Rome, the dude sitting next to me was all up in my laptop, like [peers forwards]. When I was editing he stood there with his mouth open for like 30 minutes. Then finally I was editing the Eddie Palmieri concert that Red Bull produced and towards the end, you finally get some footage of me going through my 7”s and the dude was like, “Oh, you’re a DJ.” I said, “Yeah.” I was like, thanks for having your ass all up in my face. Julian Brimmers I think I speak for everyone that we are as curious as he was to see that. So thanks so much for sharing all that with us. Bobbito Garcia For sure. You can go to rockrubber45s.com or follow @rockrubber45s on Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, to see production photos and information and everything. Julian Brimmers Thanks Bobbito. Bobbito Garcia Are we gonna open it up for questions from the crowd? Audience member When you talked about Big L, I remembered MF Grimm and the story about the recording of the song in Large Professor’s Live At The Barbecue. I know that MF Grimm got shot when he’s on his way to the studio. That’s the first appearance of Nas in a song. I’m impressed by this story because, if that hadn’t happened, maybe MF Grimm would be in the place of Nas nowadays. Are there any artists or MCs that have been on your show that you thought were very dope but they stayed underrated? Bobbito Garcia Yeah, I mean, in the eight years that me and Stretch did the radio show — and I continued to do the show for four years after that, so, I was on radio for 12 years — in the eight years of me and Stretch being on air together, we had 300 unsigned artists come to our show, and I can tell that there was no shortage of phenomenal MCs. So sure, some went into the stratosphere with record sales and awareness and shows, but there were many who were well deserving. Just not in the right place at the right time, or didn’t have the right producer, or didn’t have the right manager, or didn’t have the right record label. That didn’t take anything away from their performance on our show. For example, the longest freestyle in the film, Stretch and Bobbito: Radio That Changed Lives, is not Nas, is not Biggie, it’s not Jay-Z, it’s by O.C. He is someone who we felt completely embodied the ethos of hip-hop and the best it could present. He was compelling, he was authentic, he was spirited, he was intelligent. Great presence onstage. Great live show. I mean, he had everything lined up to be a star, and it didn’t happen for him. And that’s fine, you know. It’s not meant for everybody. I didn’t get paid to do the radio show. I did it anyway. The best artists, in my estimation, didn’t rhyme so that they could get a contract and get millions of record sales. They rhymed, as O.C. said in the song “Times Up”: “It’s the principle of it, I get a rush when I bust some dope rhymes I wrote, that maybe somebody will quote.” In a very innocent way, that’s why we came to hip-hop. Stretch and I didn’t do the radio show to become globally renowned. We did a radio show because it was the principle of it. We wanted to play dope music and help great artists be exposed. So, yeah, there’s a lot of artists, a lot of artists. Audience member Can I ask you feel about nowadays on your shows — is there anything you’re missing from them, like live performances and freestyles? Because we have a lot of popular shows nowadays but there are already sets which they play. They are not many live appearances, like in your show. Bobbito Garcia I can’t really say. I stopped listening to radio about 15 years ago. That’s FM radio, and online radio is even more difficult for me. That’s not to… there are still great radio shows out there that are worthy of your attention. There are amazing artists out there who are making songs that are worthy of your attention. When I retired from radio, I felt like I’d done my duty to the cause and had to move on and do other things, and focus on other things and put my attention into other things that challenged me, like filmmaking. Filmmaking is a challenge for me because, as Julian said, I had no experience. Writing a book challenged me. I had never written a book before. Producing TV shows. It’s other ways of expressing myself. Each of those things, because I always strive for excellence in everything that I do, that requires that I’m gonna — just the same way that me and Stretch listened to hours and hours, hundreds of songs a week — that’s what I do now when it comes to filmmaking, or when it comes to my basketball tournament, Full Court 21, which is presented in four continents around the world and 20 international cities. Everything I do is always original and challenging. I don’t have the time or the interest to really tell you what radio shows are missing now or what they should do. I don’t know. Actually, it would be better if you answered that question yourself, if you’re in that mix. Julian Brimmers But you also meant live shows, right? Like, did you also mean hip-hop live shows, or just regular shows? Audience member I mean live on the radio. Julian Brimmers Right, that kind of live element. Bobbito Garcia Yeah, I mean, it’s interesting because the impetus behind us having so many MCs live back then was that you couldn’t hear them otherwise. Like, if you were unsigned, there were artists on our show who didn’t even have demos. Like Big Pun, when he came onto the show as an unsigned MC, he did not even have a demo. He had never recorded in a studio. We gave him a platform. But now, I know artists who — look at Chance The Rapper, this dude doesn’t have a record label deal. He’s putting out mixtapes. He’s not even putting out vinyl or CDs, it’s just digital release and that’s it, and he’s world famous, winning Grammys and everything. So, you know, the whole model has changed. That doesn’t take away the need for live. Audience member Thinking about Chance The Rapper, are there any names… Bobbito Garcia Hold on, hold on, hold on. [To host] You gonna let her ask a third question? Does anyone else have questions? [Laughter] I’m just messing with you. Julian Brimmers I also really want to hear what you have to say about Chance The Rapper. Audience member No, I don’t want to talk about him. I would like to ask about which are your personal favorites from now, new school MCs. Bobbito Garcia I can’t really say. Audience member Do you follow the scene? Bobbito Garcia I don’t. I’m a vinyl dude, right? I’m a hip-hop head who grew up dancing. So a lot of the current rap, I don’t find it danceable. As a DJ who only plays vinyl, that cuts. Like, when I go record shopping, if I happen to be like, “Oh, that record looks interesting.” If I listen to it, nine out of ten times, the record is not going to be danceable at all. It’s just gonna be a hip-hop record that’s more like head-nod, you know, more about the lyrics. Which is great, but because I have limited time to listen to records and because I have limited time to get my records ready to DJ, I prioritize records that I can dance to. Audience member Did you hear about Anderson .Paak? Bobbito Garcia And that is the fourth question. Oh my god, why don’t you just sit here? Julian, go back to the crowd! She’s taken over your job. Julian Brimmers I reckon the answer is probably no, for Anderson .Paak? Do you know Anderson .Paak? Bobbito Garcia Yeah, I’m aware of him. I don’t know his music well, but I’m aware of him. Audience member Thank you. Julian Brimmers Thank you. Are there any further questions? Bobbito Garcia Wait, give her a round of applause, please. [Applause] Julian Brimmers So, it’s an open mic. Sir in the Quasimodo shirt. Audience member Hi, my question is about the record label, Fondle ‘Em. How did you decide to start it and what was the idea behind it? Was it to get big, like Def Jam? Or was it just something to do with people you know? Bobbito Garcia I had the great fortune of working for Def Jam, as I mentioned, one of the prominent record labels in music history, right? Then I left in ‘93 to start a label with Pete Nice, from the group 3rd Bass, called Hoppoh. We released and artist named Curious, we also released Count Base D. When KMD got released from their deal with Elektra, when the Black Bastards album was rejected by the label, we actually tried to grab KMD and put them out on Hoppoh, which was distributed by Columbia. I think they were still Columbia CBS, they hadn’t become Columbia Sony yet. But Columbia didn’t allow us to sign KMD. We also discovered a group called Mudbones, who had a phenomenal MC. Back to [the question about] the unknown MCs who never really made it, Mudbones had a lead MC in the group who was a kid named Cage. Cage used to come up to me and Stretch’s show, crushed it. He became a sort of underground all-star, if you will. We tried to sign Cage to Hoppoh Columbia as well. None of that happened. It was frustrating for me and Pete, quite honestly. I was on the radio with Stretch, playing a lot of demos when Stretch wasn’t there, because I still had to put forth great music in the absence of my favorite DJ in the world. There was a dude named Rich King who worked at Big Daddy Distribution in New Jersey. He was like, “Yo, you got all these incredible demos. What are you doing with them? There’s people around the world that would love to have more vinyl.” I was like, “I don’t know.” First of all, we had artists on the show that were sticklers about us playing promos but only playing them once, which was really annoying for our listeners, because they’d be calling us up for a year, like, “Yo, please, play that Godfather Don/Kool Keith record.” We’re like, “Nah, sorry.” It’s totally the opposite of the today, right? You’d be like, “Oh, let me do a Google search, Godfather Don/Kool Keith. Oh, word. It’s there.” We would fuck with people. It’s like, “You want to hear that? We’re never playing it again!” [Laughs] Rich was like, “Yo, speak to Godfather Don and Kool Keith about putting out the Cenubites.” That was their group. I spoke to them, and it took some convincing, but they were like, “Yo, cool. Go for it.” We pressed up, I don’t know, 2,000, 3,000 copies of the Cenubites. That was the first release. That was in December of ‘95. It turned out that I was really ahead of the curve, because in ‘96 or ‘97, Rich King and Joe Abajian partnered and started Fat Beats Distribution, and Fat Beats Distribution became the first company that was really just pushing hip-hop and independent hip-hop. This is what we’re about for the culture, because we’re from the culture, and we are the culture. They had the Fat Beats store as well. Then ABB came out, and Stones Throw, and Eastern Conference, and Def Jux, and all these incredible independent labels from ‘96 to ‘97 on. I’m a little bit before that with Fondle ‘Em. I put out Siah & Yeshua DapoED, and I put out MF Doom, his first release, and Cage’s first release, and the Arsonists’ first release. All these groups did very well in the independent scene. I was just in the right place at the right time with the right vision. Fondle ‘Em was a great label, but around 2001 I decided to dead it, and I started my second label, which was Fruitmeat. I started putting out music that was more representative of the full scope of what I love. I put out Spanish Harlem Orchestra, Vinia Mojica, who sang on a lot of hip-hop records. I put out Binkis, a dope hip-hop record. Then my last label was Alala, which has been a strictly 7” label. I’ve only put out records when I’ve felt strongly about them. I never had the label to pay my rent, so I never was like, “Oh my God. I got to get another new release. I’ll just put out anything.” It’s always been really spaced out, and just, “This record is incredible. It’s not on vinyl. Let me put it out.” Julian Brimmers You said your last label was Alala. Is that defunct now? Bobbito Garcia I haven’t put out… my last release on Alala was a song featuring myself. What are you laughing at? That’s not funny! [Laughs] Julian Brimmers It’s just like the first catalog number of Fondle ‘Em as well. Bobbito Garcia Yeah. I was on that, too. I wrote a song. I wrote a spoken word piece called “Park Pick-Up Player” for the film Doin’ It In The Park. I had Mark De Clive-Lowe, a really talented producer based in LA, remix it. We couldn’t find the right place for it in Doin’ It In The Park: Pick-Up Basketball, NYC, so I decided to release it as a 7”, and that was the last release that I did on Alala. It’s still available, around, if any collectors or DJs want to scoop it up. I believe it’s available on iTunes, too, although, I don’t know. I’m not a digital dude. Check it out. All right? Thanks. Audience member I have another one, if it’s okay. Bobbito Garcia Oh my God. Audience member It’s my final one. Bobbito Garcia He should sit here. Julian, you’re out of a job, man. Julian Brimmers I’m done. Yeah. Audience member You’ve worked with MF Doom. Can you share something, like a story with him, or something from the creative process? Bobbito Garcia Sure. Of course. Do you know the song “Rhymes Like Dimes”? Audience member Yeah. Of course, right? Yeah. “Rhymes Like Dimes” is a very prominent song in Doom’s career. It’s on his first album, Doomsday, which I released on my label, Fondle ‘Em. He called me up and said, “Yo, Bob. I need to sample ‘100 Ways’. I don’t have the record.” It’s not a rare record. It’s sold millions of copies, off a Quincy Jones album. I said, “Sure. Come over.” He comes over with his sampler. He plugs it into my mixer, puts the record on. I’m watching magic before my eyes. He’s looping it, he loops it in 10 minutes, puts the drums on [sings melody], he does the rhymes. He’s like, “Yo, I got the microphone. Why don’t you just hop on the end of the record?” I was like, “Nah. What am I going to say?” He was like, “Just do it for me.” I said, “All right. Whatever.” He throws a beat, and he gives me the mic, and I’m talking nonsense at the end of the record. Still, to this day, everyone’s like — when did that come out? ‘99, I think, so it’s almost 20 years later — and people on Twitter are constantly like, “Mashed potatoes, applesauce,” quoting the most nonsensical appearance in rap history. It just made no sense. It made no sense. For a minute, I just talked out of my ass, and people loved it, which, I don’t know what that says for the fans of Fondle ‘Em [laughs]. It was a fun moment. I was glad to be a part of it. That record has been re-released a bunch of times. I’ve never seen any royalties off of it [laughs], but it’s cool. Audience member Thanks. Julian Brimmers Last question maybe. Bobbito Garcia Hey, everybody give Irina a round of applause. Julian Brimmers Yeah. Give it up for Irina, please. She’s a wonderful host over here. Audience member My question is coming just from curiosity, maybe it’s a funny story about why you picked up DJ Cucumber Slice? Bobbito Garcia Oh, yes. Well, so I was known as Bobbito the Barber, the Edge Up King, the King of Swing, back in the early ‘90s on the hiphop show with Stretch. I started DJing around ‘95, was very light with it initially. The first woman to give me a weekly gig at Coney Island High said, “Yo, Bob. You gotta...” And we weren’t thinking about branding back then, or marketing, nothing like [that]. She was just like, “Yo, you got to come up with a different nickname for you as a DJ. Bobbito the Barber doesn’t really quite fit.” I was, “Ah, yeah. Good idea.” She was like, “How about Cucumber Slice?” It’s literally the first thing she said. Now, have any of you ever heard of Claw Money? She’s got a clothing line. She’s a famous graffiti artist now. She’s done design collaborations with Nike. She’s well-known streetwear. It was her. She wasn’t known at the time. She was Claudia, my homegirl Claudia. Yeah, Claw Money gave me the nickname Cucumber Slice. I just ran with it. I was like, “Word. I’m Cucumber Slice.” When I turned 40, I retired Cucumber Slice. It just didn’t feel right, being 40 years old, being like, “My name is Cucumber Slice,” so then I shifted back to Kool Bob Love, which was the earlier nickname that MC Serch, from the group 3rd Bass, had given me. All this will be detailed with archival footage and photos in my next film, Rock Rubber 45s.

---

Title: Charlotte Gainsbourg
Date: 2017-10-17
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/charlotte-gainsbourg/

Charlotte Gainsbourg
Propelled into singing at the age of 13 by her charismatic father, with whom she recorded “Lemon Incest” followed by the album Charlotte For Ever, Charlotte Gainsbourg eventually chose to make cinema her career. She returned to music in 2006 with a second album, 5:55, produced with Air, Jarvis Cocker and Nigel Godrich. Over the past decade, the acclaimed actress has pursued a dual career in music and film recording two albums with Beck, contributing to soundtracks and performing live.
In a public conversation at l’Éléphant Paname for the Red Bull Music Academy Paris Festival 2017, Gainsbourg traced her musical evolution with a playlist including songs her parents played in the house, key soundtracks and the musicians that have fanned her ongoing interest in electronic music, leading to her most recent collaborations with Parisian producer SebastiAn.
Hosted by Geraldine Sarratia Hello, thank you all for coming to the Red Bull Music Academy Festival Paris. There, I managed to say it! Could everyone please turn off their phones because this will all be recorded and filmed. We are here today for a lecture with Charlotte Gainsbourg. Charlotte, thank you for coming Charlotte Gainsbourg Thank you, thank you all for coming. Geraldine Sarratia Just a reminder what this lecture is about, we'll be exploring the relationship Charlotte has with music. It's been put together like a playlist that delves into key moments of her life and work. You all know Charlotte but to introduce her briefly. I feel like I've always known her. The first time I saw her was in 1984 in “Lemon Incest” then in cinemas in 1986 in Love Songs, then in L'Effrontée and as your career went on music and film continued to intertwine and in our lives as well. To this day, Charlotte has done over 50 films. With so many different directors I couldn't possible name them all: Todd Haynes, Arnaud Desplechin. Who else would you like to mention? Charlotte Gainsbourg Lars von Trier. Geraldine Sarratia Ah yes, very important. Charlotte Gainsbourg Yvan Attal. Geraldine Sarratia Yvan Attal, Claude Berri, there are so many. We'll talk about that at the end of this conversation. And her latest album Rest, that will be released on 17th November. Two songs have already been released, “Rest” and “Deadly Valentine.” You filmed the music video, that just came out. Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, a few days ago. Geraldine Sarratia Before we start, could I ask how you define your relationship with music? You say cinema is something you like to lose yourself in, or get caught in the action and that you find that easy to do. Is it the same for your music? What can you tell us about that? Charlotte Gainsbourg No. Music requires me to be more willful. I started acting and singing the same way, in my father's footsteps. It always made my father happy. It was natural for me, but I wasn't in control. And... With film it carried on like this. I was happy to not be in control and be at the director's service. Music, without my father has become, not necessarily my music, my relationship has become very complicated because everything had become a bit painful. It evoked the memory of my father. I still missed him too much. It took me 20 years between recording Charlotte for Ever and 5:55 with Air. It took me 20 years, to realize I wanted to do it. That maybe I was allowed to express myself through music. Then I started looking around me and started wondering with whom I could work. I never thought of doing it alone. I didn't want to. I was not capable of it. I needed to admire different artists like I had admired my father. So it was obvious to me with Air, then with Beck it was another kind of evidence. But I really needed to be able to move forward and I had trouble coming to terms with it. Geraldine Sarratia We will come back to your music, at the end of this conversation. Let's start with this playlist. Starting with your childhood. The music you listened to. I'm going to play the first track. It is a rather amusing choice for a little girl. (music: Ian Dury – “Sex & Drugs & Rock & Roll”) So that was Ian Dury, Sex & Drugs & Rock & Roll. So this was a record you enjoyed as a child? Charlotte Gainsbourg I don't remember when this came out, I should have checked. I know I was living at Rue de Verneuil with my father. My sister and I shared the same bedroom. She was 4 years older than me. So I was subject to her musical taste. But this time I really felt like the album was mine. I remember perfectly the 7", our record player was actually 12", not 7" but... I was such a fan of his voice, the rhythm. I didn't realize the trashy element to it.
Speaker: Geraldine Sarratia How old were you? Charlotte Gainsbourg I was 6 or 7 years old I think. There is a comical side to it which is what I understood. Geraldine Sarratia Do you remember how old… No, did you even buy records? Charlotte Gainsbourg When I was young, no. Actually my parents would come back... I'm not sure what they were doing there, they were signed with Philips. That then became Universal, right? Geraldine Sarratia I think so. Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes I believe so. They came back from their meetings with these 7" vinyls with no cover. Things people would just give to them. There was a bit of everything. Some were really good. And some were awful. They didn't ban us from listening to anything. They allowed us to listen to things they brought back. And at the same time, we weren't allowed to listen to Annie Cordy, I wasn't allowed to listen to Dorothée, I wasn't allowed to listen to... Wait what’s her name... Chantal Goya! That was completely forbidden. But Carlos for example wasn't. It's mean but... Geraldine Sarratia Did you buy records yourself then? Or were they all given to you? Charlotte Gainsbourg It was mainly things I was given. My sister had more refined musical tastes. She loved... Well I loved Grease too. I was a huge fan. But for her it was all about Blondie and the whole disco era. I followed the movement but I was a lot younger. I started buying records quite late actually, when I was a teenager. Geraldine Sarratia When you were a teenager there is another record you liked. Many of us here did too actually. (music: Michael Jackson – “Thriller”) We all recognized Michael Jackson's “Thriller.” Do you have any particular memory linked to this record? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes. Memories from Rue de Verneuil again. Because... My father discovered this when I did. He was as blown away by it as we all were. I remember really well. He had a big TV screen at home. And we'd watch the video that went with this song. I think that alongside “Billy Jean” it's one of the most powerful music videos. They are the first major music videos I'd seen. Geraldine Sarratia Prince also did long music videos at that time. On Michel Drucker’s show. The release was like an event, it was quite something. When you were a teenager you also listened to this. (music: Bonnie Tyler – “It’s a Heartache”) Bonnie Tyler, “It's a Heartache.” Charlotte Gainsbourg That is one of the records I bought myself, I'm completely responsible for it. It's from the year I left for boarding school. I had decided I wanted to go myself. And Walkman players had just come out. It was a certain way of listening that was really new, it was an isolated way of listening. This voice stuck so well with all the things you go through as a teenager, that very lonely feeling, ever so sad. And I'd make a big deal of this. Geraldine Sarratia Listening on your Walkman. Charlotte Gainsbourg On the train, as the scenery passed me by. Geraldine Sarratia There were also French artists that influenced you as a teenager. Aznavour for example. (music: Charles Aznavour – “Emmenez Moi”) Charles Aznavour, any particular memory for this song? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, well I find it hard taking responsibility for my choices. Since my childhood it's always been easier to say it was my father, or my sister. Aznavour is completely my choice. It really hurt my father because he was very jealous of him. Geraldine Sarratia Oh really? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes. Because Aznavour really is somebody. And I really was quite obsessed by this musical universe because it was more about the lyrics than the music. Nowadays in any case it's more about the lyrics. But it really preoccupied me for quite some time. Geraldine Sarratia You also mentioned what influenced you, how musical taste is created by things we choose. And by things from our family. A very important singer, one of the first singers your father recommended, and I believe he still is a very important singer to you. It's Bob Dylan. Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes. (music: Bob Dylan – “Lay Lady Lay”) Geraldine Sarratia Dylan was in the last Desplechin film. A wonderful scene with one of his songs. You were saying that your father recommended listening to Dylan? Charlotte Gainsbourg I recall asking him if there was one record I needed to have, or a song. Because he told me that exact song, saying it was one of the greats. He said that one and another song that I really remember that is “Somewhere Over The Rainbow” sung by Judy Garland. But for Dylan if I regret one thing, I probably got a greatest hits album. I didn't instinctively listen to each album and discover him that way, I went straight to that one song. But ever since it has stuck with me. I did a film recently called I'm Not There, Which retraced his different lives. He is someone who is very important to me, that I never tire of. Sometimes at dinner parties, if you play it too much it can get on people's nerves. Geraldine Sarratia Yes it can be provocative. Some people can't stand his voice Charlotte Gainsbourg I can listen to him for hours on end. Geraldine Sarratia Is it his writing style you like the best? He is an amazing writer. Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, his texts are wonderful. But it is also the sound of his voice, his personality, his persona. Geraldine Sarratia Another important influence from your father is a more classical choice. Classical music was also very important to him. (music: JS Bach – “Aria (Glenn Gould - Goldberg variations)”) It's very melancholic, so I won't leave it on too long. Don't you think so? Charlotte Gainsbourg Not at all. I find it very soothing and I'm always in a good mood when I listen to it. It's reassuring to come back to it. I just remembered that my father had this album, of course, but my stepfather, Lou's father, also had a copy. Bach and the variations played by Glenn Gould. At that same moment in time the album was in both my homes. Geraldine Sarratia Did your father play a lot of music at home? Charlotte Gainsbourg On the piano? No. He would play in bars, at the end of a night out. I think he had been quite traumatized as a youngster playing for his father who was very strict. He got away from that. I'd see him play mainly when he was composing. He had a piano that he could record himself on. The keys played on their own, it was a mechanical piano. Every time he did an album he let us listen to melodic ideas. So that we could grade him with little stars. My mother, myself and Philippe Lerichomme I believe. And he was very receptive to what we said. So we'd just see him at work. Geraldine Sarratia Did you all agree? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes I think so, we usually agreed. And on a last album he should have done he started to use sounds that were very Russian and very melancholic, it was really beautiful. He would play like that. Otherwise I hardly ever saw him on his grand piano. But a lot of his songs come from Chopin. So I did discover Chopin with him. Yes, classical music was very important. Geraldine Sarratia What kind of music did your mother listen to? Charlotte Gainsbourg My mother listened to a lot of [George] Brassens when she was young. She listened to The Beatles, Elvis... And so did my father, a lot. Then she listened to more French artists, she liked [Alain] Souchon. She went on tour with him, but had a big Souchon phase before. Geraldine Sarratia Was there a lot of music played at home? Charlotte Gainsbourg No, not at all. My father did, he did so very loudly, the neighbors complained all the time. Because he would only listen loudly, very very loudly. I find that is such an amazing way to listen. It is so powerful. It's not just elevator music. Geraldine Sarratia Background music? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes. He listened to his own music a lot. I found that to be pretentious at the time. As a teenager, I didn't understand why he had to listen to himself so loudly. Now I realize that back then, you didn't come home with a sample of your work. You had nothing to show for what you just did in the studio. So he did need to listen to himself, it was part of his job. So yes, he listened to his music a lot. Geraldine Sarratia You talked about the grades you would give his new melodies. What kind of relationship did you have with his music? Is there a period you prefer? One you don't like at all? Which record is your favorite? Charlotte Gainsbourg The first song of his I ever liked, he was very ashamed of this, it was “L'Ami Caouette.” Geraldine Sarratia Why was he ashamed? Charlotte Gainsbourg I'm not sure how old I was when it came out. Because it's the worst song he ever wrote. And the fact his daughter loved it, I would sing it, it didn't go unnoticed. Since, I've listened to everything he did. He didn't like his voice early on, where it sounds more like he's singing. I really liked it. And I have seen his entire filmography. I find it strange that my children never listen to my music. They wouldn't even think to. I lived with my parents music and listening to them was a real delight. It wasn't just dumb admiration. It was part of my life. On holiday, with him, and with Bambou, we'd listen to Initials B.B. all the time. Not just a little bit, a lot. Geraldine Sarratia Here is one you chose when we made this playlist. (music: Serge Gainsbourg – “Melody Nelson”) “Melody.” Why did you choose this one? Charlotte Gainsbourg I find it hard to listen to. I held back from listening to it for 26 years. But this song has an influence on me without even listening to it. It really is a part of me. Melody might just be the album I've listened to the most. I really like these conceptual albums that tell a story. It's a short album. There is something magical about this album. Geraldine Sarratia The album cover? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, I'm on it! And it brought both my parents together, which is important. I saw my mother live recently. She has been doing this concept with a symphony orchestra for quite some time. But her choice of songs in my eyes talk about her love story with him. It focuses on... I feel like I'm seeing my parents and their story together. Which is even more touching for me. And she adds a symphony orchestra to it, which gives it a certain magnitude. Geraldine Sarratia Isn't Melody Nelson an album that producers you've worked with talk about? Beck must be a fan of that album. Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, but every time I worked with Air, Beck or SebastiAn we don't talk about it. We don't speak of it, but we all know about it. But with Beck, I spoke to him about the percussion albums my father did. Because that was the rhythm I was looking for. I know he is a fan of my father. Melody is probably one of his favourite albums. But... I was the one to talk about it, they were sensitive enough to not force it on me. Geraldine Sarratia There are your father's albums. Then you started singing with your father, in 1984. We mentioned it earlier, “Lemon Incest.” (music: Serge Gainsbourg – “Lemon Incest”) Can you tell us about Lemon Incest? It's still a very important song for you? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, for me it's the most important. From the experiences I have had with my father in music in any case. It was the first time he put me behind a microphone. I took part in this adventure without realizing what the subject matter was. It didn't shock me. I wasn't aware of the scandal surrounding it because I was 12 when we recorded it. And the year after I left for boarding school. I wasn't there for the release. When we recorded it, I was young enough to not care about it at all. Yet I understood the pleasure he got from making it. Hearing me hit those high notes and my voice breaking a bit. And those were things he was aiming at. And seeing me achieve this little thing. Then I forgot about it the minute I'd finished. And that's fine, it wasn't a big deal. In any case, it's a very precious memory for me. Geraldine Sarratia Do you remember how it came about? Did you tell him you'd like to sing? Charlotte Gainsbourg I don't remember. Geraldine Sarratia Ah you don't remember. Charlotte Gainsbourg I think it's thanks to my mother, because my father had talked to her about it. And she bumped into Catherine Deneuve in the street and asked for her advice. Asking her if she thought it was dangerous for me to sing with him. I believe Catherine said to her that first I should do something on my own, for myself. Then I did Love Songs, which was with Catherine. I mean I auditioned, I wasn't just given the part. She was right. I managed to do something great with him and be able to exist on my own. With a promising acting career in tow, not that I could have known that. But it was important for me to have my own personality and my own thing. Geraldine Sarratia So now we have come to the records you enjoy as an adult. The first one to really affect you. (music: Portishead – “Glory Box”) Portishead, “Glory Box.” Charlotte Gainsbourg It really was important, I remember its release. I mean it affected many people like it did me. A new sound, a new personality. Even on stage, she was different. I think it's at that point I started to ask myself what if I wanted to start making music again? It really motivated me. Geraldine Sarratia How old were you then? Do you remember? Charlotte Gainsbourg I was with Yvan, I was 20 years old maybe. Yes, yes. Geraldine Sarratia Another one of your choices, this time a band. I believe it's a band you really love. And you worked with their producer after. It's Radiohead. (music: Radiohead – “You and Whose Army?”) So, Radiohead, what can you tell us about that? Charlotte Gainsbourg I tried to find my favorite song of theirs, but there are so many. It's like with Dylan and Bowie. They have so many albums I can just listen to all the way through. For 10-15 years I think, I loved them non-stop. It's also, I saw what it feels like to be completely absorbed by music seeing them live. Through Thom Yorke, because he is the one I look at. I can see something almost animal-like, that I have rarely seen. Another way of making music. Geraldine Sarratia And you chose another song even more contemporary than Radiohead, Blood Orange, from New York, where you live now, who performs with you in the “Deadly Valentine” music video. Here is a short sample. (music: Blood Orange – “Best To You”) Tell us a bit about this musician, Blood Orange. Charlotte Gainsbourg Meeting him didn't happen by accident, I asked to meet him. I didn't know much about his work. He actually advised me... He then became a friend and I asked him for a lot of advice about my lyrics. In English. Just to be sure if I was going in the right direction. In French I have enough perspective and knowledge. In English, I fumble a bit more. My mother helped me, but he comforted me, telling me I was going in the right direction. Then, I knew he is a great dancer, and asked him to take part in a music video. All of that was new to me, being behind the video camera. It really was a new adventure. And he played along with it. And since then I saw him live, I saw him in Tokyo. He has become a close friend. I'm happy that we... It's not necessarily coincidental, but there was a certain affinity, which gave way to friendship. Geraldine Sarratia Another important chapter of your playlist which is linked to your new album is film soundtracks. Which is very important to you. It has influenced your music and you have been in a lot of films with music in them. So we are going to listen to a few samples from film soundtracks. Firstly, the ones that count a lot for you. One of the first ones. I think your father recommended this music. (music: Judy Garland – “Somewhere Over The Rainbow”) Judy Garland, it’s not the movie’s version but we’ll pretend. Do you remember this? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes. I really was brought up with a lot of musicals, which was more my mother's doing. But at my father's house, once they had separated, we watched a lot of films and The Wizard of Oz was one of them. And he always said... That song was, in his opinion, one of the most beautiful songs ever made. It was Judy Garland's voice, obviously... Geraldine Sarratia Did you also see this at your father's house? (music: John Williams – “Theme from Jaws”) Charlotte Gainsbourg That one's my mother's fault. She took me to London when I was 4 I think. When it came out I was 4 I think. She took Kate and I to London where the film wasn’t banned. I saw this film and it traumatized me. Geraldine Sarratia Jaws for those of you who didn't recognize it.
Speaker: Charlotte Gainsbourg It's incredible, the soundtrack has haunted me ever since. I remember everything. Of course I saw the film again. I listened to it again, with great pleasure. It is a very prominent memory. Geraldine Sarratia Now we're going to move on to soundtracks from films you have played in. This one I really like. That's from the soundtrack of L'Éffrontée. (music: Ricchi e Poveri – “Sarà Perchè Ti Amo”) What memories come to mind hearing that? Charlotte Gainsbourg It was the first film after Love Songs where I had a main role. I spent 2 months filming, alone with the team. With Claude Miller, who I did a film with afterwards. I think it's my fondest memory from the film set. This song already existed when we started filming. They would put it on during the scene where everyone was walking, with Julie. The music from films is not necessarily something you remember from the film set. It's not necessarily very present. This song really followed me through my first acting experience. Geraldine Sarratia Here is another song from a film you must remember because it was with Lars Von Trier, a major director you've worked with. And you were actually the one who performed this song. An extract from Nymphomaniac… (music: Charlotte Gainsbourg – “Hey Joe”) “Hey Joe,” a Jimi Hendrix cover. Charlotte Gainsbourg It was done quite late on, once we had finished the film with Lars. He actually wanted me to ask Beck. I wasn't sure that Beck would accept but he was really up for it. Even though we had already made an album together this time we recorded our parts alone. He made the music, heavily influenced by my father's work and I sung my parts alone in a studio. So it wasn't a project we came together for but I was really happy that Lars asked me to do it. Until that point, it was our third film together, and I didn't think he thought of me as a singer. I don't even know which of my films he's seen other than his own, so I could be perceived by him in a new way. The final product was less important than the fact he asked me to do it. Geraldine Sarratia You spoke about Beck who you worked with on this track. Now we are going to talk about your albums, you did Charlotte For Ever in 1986. Then, 20 years later you did 5:55 that you recorded with Air, Jarvis Cocker and Neil Godrich. Then you did two albums with Beck, especially IRM. Charlotte Gainsbourg IRM, then we did a live performance. Geraldine Sarratia Stage Whisper. Charlotte Gainsbourg It wasn't an album, it was live recordings. We added extra songs we already had done with Beck and some other collaborations. Geraldine Sarratia We're going to listen to a song from the album IRM, well it's actually the song “IRM.” (music: Charlotte Gainsbourg – “IRM”) “IRM,” with Beck. Charlotte Gainsbourg I really love his writing style. I really respect his work so when I asked him I didn't expect him to say yes. We met up in the studio and he said, for the both of us, we'd have to see if it worked well together. We did three songs together, “Heaven Can Wait” was one of the first ones. We realized that we had good musical chemistry Then I went back, and the album was made bit by bit at his house in Los Angeles. And at each stage, it took a new direction. I went to see him and I had just had a serious accident and had to do some MRI scans. I had done a lot of them. So I felt like the best way for me to personally involve myself in the album was to speak about that and make music about it. There wasn't a negative side to it because MRIs are reassuring now. So I really wanted to find a musical element to it. And Beck's response was that he couldn't think of something more exciting. Because he would start off with the rhythm and that's why the percussion album was important. The beginning of every song originated from a rhythm he had either recorded before and I saw the tracks being created with him and it really was magical understanding how he composed songs and how he wrote. That's one of the reasons why I didn't really try to write at that point. It was so easy for him, he'd go away with his notebook and come up with stuff just like that. Geraldine Sarratia I recall there being some parts of Apolinaire's poems sampled in “La Collectionneuse.” Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, because when he was writing he managed to put into words exactly what I meant. So I tried to find other sources of inspiration and direct him on other songs to make the album more personal. And Apollinaire was an easy one to delve into. Geraldine Sarratia So we talked about your new album Rest, we've already heard two tracks. This time you worked with SebastiAn, a well-known producer in the French electronic sphere. He started off at Ed Banger Records and has done many projects since. He's worked with Philippe Katerine, Frank Ocean. How was it working with him? We're going to listen to two new tracks, not the two last releases though. Charlotte Gainsbourg When I did the live performance, well the second one with Connan Mockasin, we got to know each other with Connan and he was convinced I had to write in French and he wanted to help me. So we started doing work sessions together, he was on the guitar. I had less inhibitions because he doesn't understand French. So I started trying to put words to his music. I left with a few songs I liked. But I knew, I mean not “but,” just after that I started thinking about a new album. And electronic music had already become a vital element a long time ago. It's a style of music I love. And listening to SebastiAn and discovering his work, I realised that all the violence, brutality and orchestration in his songs, the very broad and brutal element to it, was what I wanted. And I wanted to see if my voice, that isn't very strong, would mix with that kind of universe. And some of my inspiration came from film soundtracks, that were all horror films with very heavy atmospheres. I went to see him, no, he came to my house. And our first meeting wasn't very promising. It's a shame he isn't here because we laugh about it now. He was very sure of himself and he was right in saying that I needed to sing in French that I should sing more like I did in my first album that I did with my father. You might say he was lecturing me. But I found him to be very charming in spite of that. Geraldine Sarratia A bit arrogant? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes. He was playing a part, like all shy people do. I found that touching. Anyway, not a lot happened after that. I gave him a list of film soundtracks, there was some Georges Delerue in there too. There was a lot of music that people in the electronic sphere know about, like [Giorgio] Moroder. That kind of style. But there was also Psycho, more orchestrated pieces. And some classical music. There was also Béla Bartók that inspired me. My ambition was chaotic. He replied with, I think, five demos which were exactly what I was hoping for. It was all I had dreamt for. So I replied but... You know SebastiAn, he's really tough! He's really hard to catch, so we met several times. We had several work sessions, which weren't because we didn’t get any results, and by that time I had recorded with Guy-Man[uel de homem-christo] the song “Rest,” Which was just a side project, an encounter because I admire him a lot. He had a loop he wanted to show me. I started to write with Guy-Man, I used my personal notes, diaries. Geraldine Sarratia Your notebooks. Charlotte Gainsbourg My sister had just passed away, so we shortened it down and tried to abridge what I wanted to say. Looking back we did it in quite a naive way but it was very spontaneous. So that was done. After that I needed to leave Paris. I moved to New York. At that point SebastiAn finally understood we had to do the album then, and that he had to come. So he came and it finally took shape. Geraldine Sarratia Here is a snippet of one of the more electronic tracks. (music: Charlotte Gainsbourg – “Les Oxalis”) So to hear the rest you'll have to wait till the 17th of November. “Les Oxalis,” a song in French. Charlotte Gainsbourg It's one of the last ones we recorded. Not necessarily the last one, but... We wanted to make something more uptempo. And I really wanted to use that text with this song. And SebastiAn wasn't... Geraldine Sarratia It's quite a sad text, right? Visiting a cemetery. Charlotte Gainsbourg He was scared I wouldn't take responsibility for it afterwards. And for me that's what the album was about. There are texts, they aren't all painful but... With some very personal and intimate content. And I wanted there to be a contrast with the music. Given the shamelessness of my texts I needed there to be a bit of modesty in the music. And I believe that SebastiAn really understood that and he made me understand that loss and grief could pass through violence and not just by indulging in one's own misfortune. And that's what I wanted to express with this album. That's the last song of the album. And after that the style is nearly, I would say disco. There is what you might call an antithesis Nut that's what I was hoping for. Geraldine Sarratia Here's another extract. (music: Charlotte Gainsbourg – “Lying With You”) Another one where here you aren't particularly gentle with yourself. It's “Lying With You.” So “Lying With You” is about your father's death. Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, it's one of the first texts I wrote. It is what it is. My memory of him is torn between my childhood memories and that moment when I saw him dead. It is... I think I wanted to speak about him in a blunt way. And for it to be... It is a declaration of love but, I'm tougher in French than in English. And in English I'm a lot more affectionate, in the English choruses. So by speaking in English I could distance myself and embrace him and I used French to be a bit more vindictive. It was very important to me to be able to talk about that. There are some songs I wrote before my sister passed away. It became compulsive, I could only write about her. But I had tried to do so before, I had started this record beforehand. Yes, as if the necessity demands
you to do certain things which gave rise to this record. Along with the trip to New York that enabled me to write because, even if I wrote this text in Paris, after that, I allowed myself to be shameless, self-critical yet still constructive. It's precisely because I was in an unknown place, completely isolated. I could rediscover myself and go through a sort of rebirth. I had to push myself into this new life. It's a mix of... It is a moment of my life as well. Even if it took 3 or 4 years it is still a moment of my life. Geraldine Sarratia It's an excellent record in any case. We have reached the end of this lecture, we have finished our playlist. So now is the time if you have any questions, please let us know. Are we going to give the microphone to the audience or is there an extra one? Audience Member Firstly, thank you very much for this conversation. There is a song that really touched me in the IRM album that my father got me for my birthday, it was a few years ago, I was very young and at the time, there was a song I didn't understand. Since I now have the opportunity to ask, “Le Chat du Café des Artistes,” it's a song that delves into a very particular atmosphere. I believe the lyrics go... “If you won't bury me...” I can't remember properly now I'm caught in the moment. Charlotte Gainsbourg I'm not going to remember either. Audience Member I wanted to know if you remember the way you recorded it? Charlotte Gainsbourg It's not a song I knew of before, Beck made me listen to it. And I translated it for him. The lyrics are very strange. Mysterious yet trashy at the same time. I met the original artist, whose name is Jean-Pierre Ferland I think. In any case, I met him in Montréal. He is a Canadian artist. It was magical, but I love the original, you should give it a listen. There are children singing on it, it's quite lovely. Audience Member If you wouldn't mind could I read you a poem I wrote for you? Charlotte Gainsbourg Oh really? Audience Member I don't know if I should read it? Charlotte Gainsbourg Of course you should! It's very brave of you. Audience Member It doesn't have a title yet. “A rasping cough, Along the cords, A vocal snack, a bitumen snack, On my tongue while yours, Naked in a surgical fog, Nothing left, over a drink, Not one bubble left, To rip the blindfold from my eyes. You fit me like a glove. You are here yet absent. Like the last sigh of a child, You absorb me. A sofa in the decor. The decor of my soul. A lie in a few sounds. A nightmare in a few gestures. I only have a few memories left. Don't steal them from me, Before my tears can avoid it.” That's it. Charlotte Gainsbourg Well done! Audience Member Can I give it to you? Charlotte Gainsbourg Definitely. Can you tell me more about it? Thank you very much. Audience Member I wrote it just before I got here whilst listening to IRM, which is a really important album to me. And thank you very much for the new album. Charlotte Gainsbourg Thank you. Audience Member Hello. I think your next album comes out late November? Charlotte Gainsbourg November 17th, yes. Audience Member Are you going to do a live concert? Charlotte Gainsbourg I would like to. I'm counting on SebastiAn, but today he didn't come when he was supposed to. I hope he'll be there when we are supposed to play together. I'd like to do it with him. And maybe one other artist. I'm hoping to find... I find that, I need more than just my own presence behind a microphone. It's not enough. I like there to be something more visual, for it to cost me. I like there to be an effort so I'm not sure how I'll do it, but I'm working on it. Audience Member Thank you. Audience Member Hello. There are so many questions I've been meaning to ask you but I've just chosen one. I've seen you live a few times. You sang “Couleur Café” and L'Hôtel Particulier. I'm disappointed because Hôtel Particulier is sublime and isn't on Stage Whisper. Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, but, everything I performed live was rubbish, I didn't like it. I forced myself to do this record that I liked a lot less. Audience Member Ok. So my question is why did you choose a cheerful song like “Couleur Café” from your father's work? Charlotte Gainsbourg Because it was a percussion track, which made sense with the album with Beck. That's why. And maybe it was because it was a more cheerful… It was a pleasure to... I think my mother does that song too. Maybe before I did. Maybe I copied her. That's all, it's not my favorite song of his but it made sense when making this album and the way we made it with Beck. Audience Member Thank you. Charlotte Gainsbourg Thank you. Audience Member I have a question about the music video for “Deadly Valentine,” that I really like. I was wondering why you didn't ask your mother to play the old lady? Charlotte Gainsbourg I know, I know. Audience Member It would have been… Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, it would have been good. But I didn't dare ask because it was in New York, she was busy with her concerts. If I film my mother, I have filmed her since, I went to Japan, I started filming on my own, and I'll be able to do six video clips. It was a real challenge to begin with. I pushed myself and thanks to my friend Nathalie Canguilhem who pushed me too. Who assisted me throughout the whole project. Ever since, I have realised if there is one person I want to film, it's my mother. I went to Japan and followed her. I want to do something with it but it's not finished yet. There you have it. It would have been ideal to have her, but there you go. I didn't even talk to her about doing it. Audience Member Oh yes? Charlotte Gainsbourg No. I was too reserved, I didn't dare. Audience Member Hello Charlotte Charlotte Gainsbourg Hello. Audience Member Was “Couleur Café” an allusion to your father? He finished his shows with “Couleur Café.” Charlotte Gainsbourg Ok. Audience Member He would finish on “Couleur Café.” Charlotte Gainsbourg I think my mother ended one of her concerts with “Couleur Café.” Audience Member Yes she did. Charlotte Gainsbourg Well, there you go, I'm not very original. Audience Member Could you bring out your album a bit earlier perhaps? Charlotte Gainsbourg I want it to be released too! I've been living with it for a long time now. But I'm happy because we need to do the visual part and I have been taking photos for it too. I have a much more active role for the first time. We have finalized the music and now we are finalizing the images. And November is the time necessary to achieve that. Audience Member Perfect, thank you. Audience Member Hello Charlotte, I have a question. This time you wrote all the texts for the album. Could we hope that you make the music next time? That you play a bit of piano? Charlotte Gainsbourg Yes, I don't play the piano on this album. Audience Member No, I mean on the next one. The 6th one. Charlotte Gainsbourg The problem is that I started off playing classical music, at the age of 9. I only know how to play classical music, I lacked the dexterity to try doing jazz and improvise. It's something I lack. Of course I'm tempted I'm tempted to just try some melodies. I'd love to be able to. I'd hope to one day, maybe not the next one. I do love collaborating, I love what emerges from an encounter. I feel like this album really is my album. But SebastiAn played along with me and lent me his personality because that is really a part of it too. There is his sense of humour. I mean, it's not a comedy album. There really is his personal touch to it. And I like using other people's personal touch. Geraldine Sarratia Ok guys, time's up, thank you to you all. Charlotte Gainsbourg Thank you everyone and for the warm welcome.

---

Title: DJ Storm
Date: 2018-02-23
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/dj-storm-lecture/

DJ Storm
Few nicknames in dance music have been as rightfully earned as DJ Storm’s “First Lady of Drum & Bass.” It all began in early ’90s London, when Jayne Conneely discovered the weird and wonderful world of UK rave thanks to her close friend Valerie Olukemi A Olusanya. The pair soon became regulars at Heaven, the London club where jungle would eventually be born from the clashing of breakbeats and techno. They learned to DJ and involved themselves in the scene, eventually crossing paths with a young aspiring artist named Goldie. By the end of the decade, Kemistry & Storm had become a well-respected DJing duo, and the quiet force behind Goldie’s Metalheadz empire. After Kemistry passed away in a car accident in 1999, Storm continued to strike it out as the rare female role model in a male-dominated scene.
In this public talk as part of the 2018 CTM Festival in Berlin, and held at the Red Bull Music Studios, DJ Storm sat with Torsten Schmidt – 20 years since they first spoke at the inaugural edition of the Academy – for an inspiring conversation about the early days of drum & bass, life with Kemi, the joys of the mix and the trials and tribulations of maintaining a DJing career.
Hosted by Torsten Schmidt My name is Torsten Schmidt and I had the privilege to be amongst the people that founded the thing called the Red Bull Music Academy, in a different millennium. Actually, we’re here today because what we do a lot is speak to people because we want to hear their stories, what they experienced and what we can learn from them. It is with utmost pleasure that I’d like you to welcome a person that I personally learned a fair bit from… introducing the original first lady of drum & bass, DJ Storm. DJ Storm Hello everyone. It’s nice to be back. I was at the first Red Bull Music Academy, wasn’t I? Torsten Schmidt That is true as well. DJ Storm Kemistry and Storm. Torsten Schmidt [It was] just down the road, actually. DJ Storm Wow, in that big house. Torsten Schmidt Not too far away, in Friedrichshainthat was a little different but not that much has changed the book is still there [gestures to a book on the couch], there’s decks… DJ Storm The studio’s kind of changed. Torsten Schmidt They kind of do. DJ Storm Yeah. But what was lovely about that was we met two of our heroes, me and Kemi… We met John Acquaviva and Richie Hawtin, and that was fantastic, so thank you for that. Torsten Schmidt In which regard were they heroes? DJ Storm Well, we sat with them and Richie Hawtin started getting angry… sorry John Acquaviva started getting angry, said he was so annoyed when people came with their vinyl and they didn’t check the Technics, and then they wondered why things started jumping and so on. So, it was interesting and me and Kemi came out, we were like, “John Acquaviva’s our hero.” Torsten Schmidt Probably introduce the person that’s sadly not here with us, but as the Persians would say, their spaces is open. DJ Storm Absolutely. Torsten Schmidt Who is Kemi, or who was she to you? DJ Storm Kemi was my DJ partner. We were friends for years before we started to become DJs. I had moved away to train in Oxford to become a therapeutic radiographer and she moved to Sheffield, [in the] north of England. Her boyfriend had been employed, he was one of the first graphic design companies that ever was set up in Sheffield, and she went up there and she was doing make-up artist work, and then she worked for a guy called Jarvis Cocker. She worked for this label, FON Records. She happened to move down to London about two weeks before I qualified, and I needed a place to stay, so I could go and do some work placements. She said, “I’m living in this big Victorian house, the bedroom is massive. We’ll just buy another little mattress. Come and live with me, and we’ll share the rent.” Then she’d be going out to all these [places] – I don’t know what she was going out to – and she’d be coming back and sitting on her bed and singing tunes and laughing and I was like, “Where are you going?” She said, “I’ve discovered this thing called raving.” I was like, “Oh, OK. I’ve just come from Oxford… come on.” I was like, “Electronic music’s not really for me.” She said, “You need to hear it.” So, she bombarded me with every pirate radio station that you possibly could. So, now my life was full of I suppose we called it hardcore then. Me and my other friend Nikki, who was also a radiographer, we decided, “Let’s go and see what this raving’s all about.” We actually really realized that we were really loving the music. So, I became the driver for her and her big crew from Red or Dead, the shoe shop, where she used to work]. The guy there, who was the manager, he would decide every week where they would go. They’d find a new place to rave, or something would happen. I became their driver… We’d hire a big vehicle and I’d take them, and we’d basically watch them raving, and listen to the music. Then, I think it was 1989, and the manager of Red or Dead had heard that there were these two DJs Fabio and Grooverider in this club called Heaven that had been bought from the upstairs room to downstairs. [Apparently,] they were so good that they made all the girls take their tops off. So, of course the guys wanted to go to this place and we’ve just went along for the ride basically. Torsten Schmidt [Heaven] was basically a gay club though. DJ Storm Rage was basically a gay club, yeah absolutely. I think it was Kit Kat Club before. That was known as a gay club, and the guy running it was a gay guy, yeah, absolutely. So, the first time we went down there you had to go through all this rigmarole of membership, and we only got to hear this guy who we’d heard once before – he was called Grooverider – and we’d realized that we really, really liked this guy. When it came to New Year’s Eve that year, we couldn’t find a rave to get into, so we were going to go home, and I was at the petrol station filling up my car, and these guys say, “Where are you going?” We said, “We tried this rave, we can’t get in. We didn’t buy tickets, we didn’t think about it.” [One of them] said, “Don’t worry there’s an illegal rave in this Panasonic warehouse in Slough – follow us." So, off we went, and we heard Carl Cox and Paul Oakenfold and lots of big people that night. But the one guy that really stood out for us was Grooverider. I suppose their story at that time was that you weren’t supposed to mix house with acid or mix house with techno. But they liked it… Carl Cox was like, “It’ll never work.” So, we got turned on by that and, growing up in the time that Kemi and I grew up, we were always vinyl junkies – Kemi and I, our vinyl collection was vast already. So, we started buying this stuff. In 1990, we went on a year of really, really hard raving. We were at the Ice Valley ice rink in Lea Bridge Road [East London] at about, I don’t know, two o’clock in the morning… I was listening to these two tunes, and I was thinking, “We’ve got these two tunes and they’re not the same speed, yet this guy’s making them the same speed. I don’t really understand.” So, I migrated towards the decks, and I was looking at this deck with the red light on, I’d never seen it before. So, I saw this guy next to me and I said, “What’s going on there?” He said, “It’s called a Technics. It’s got a pitch-bend, they’re mixing.” I was like, “Right.” As I looked across the other side of the decks, there was Kemi doing exactly the same. So, we came out that night and we said, “OK we obviously want to be with this music 24/7. Let’s become DJs.” I suppose that’s how it started for us. We didn’t really engage in the world for about six months at one point. I remember coming downstairs and our landlady said, “Do you realize we’re going to war with Iraq?” We were like, “Really?” We didn’t know – we were just raving. Our obsession was there, so we had to do something about it. We started making a fund for the decks. I managed to get a job in a private hospital, which was three times as much money as I was earning for the NHS. So, now we had a really nice vinyl fund. Then Kemi was at work one day in Camden, and this guy had come in the shop… she said, “This really strange guy came in the shop today and he had gold teeth.” I was like, “How do you mean?” She said, “Like the whole thing, gold. He [Goldie] has asked me to come and do a photoshoot at his house tonight at eight o’clock.” I said, “Eight o’clock?” I said, “That’s like a date, right?” She said, “I don’t know, but pick me up at 12. Don’t leave me there.” I said, “OK.” She told me now he’s this graffiti artist and she had to pretty much lay down the law to him to say, “I think for the next few years I think I’m going to be quite selfish. I’m into this thing called hardcore. I want to become a DJ, and I think I’m not going to have too much time for relationships. I think I’m going to have to make a lot of sacrifices, but if you want to come along and hear this music, fine.” So, we took him to Rage and he’d just come from his art exhibition – that’s why he came back to England, because he had this big graffiti art exhibition and this film had been done about him called Bombing. He was getting a little bit… there was a lot of notoriety about him and we were a bit clueless really, because we weren’t into hip-hop, and we weren’t into graffiti at all – we were just into this raving thing. So, anyway, he came to Rage and he wouldn’t come downstairs to hear Grooverider or Fabio, and we were quite disappointed in him really. We’re like, “What’s your problem?” He’s was like “What happened? There’s black people and Chinese people and Indian people.” We were like, what are you on about? He said, “I’ve come from Miami where there’s a black club, there’s a Hispanic club, there’s a white club and we don’t [mix]…” We were like, “You missed the summer of love, where we all came together, raving in fields, and we became quite anti-establishment, because they wanted to stop us dancing – they wanted to stop us enjoying music and we didn’t want that to happen.” I suppose this hardcore scene had become quite antiestablishment, really. We just wanted to do our thing and we didn’t really care about the government, so we’d all come together and it didn’t matter where you were from, what you looked like, what you wore. We were all joined by music. In Rage, people only really said “Tune,” to you and then carried on raving… There was no last dance, there was no snogging in the corner. It was just people really loving music and coming together with music. It was quite a different thing at the time … The second time we took Goldie, we made him come down. Then realized, and that was it. We came home that night and he said, “Right. I want to make this music. I’m going to become a producer. You two are going to play it. We’re going to have a lifestyle kind of label, like Stussy. I can do the art work.” I suppose, for the next few years, we really did just live that dream… and of course, I [remember] him running up on the stage for a very famous record label at the that time, Reinforced Records, who had this big hit out called “Mr Kirk’s Nightmare”… He ran on stage right in the middle of their set, and we were mortified. But actually, it changed our lives, really, because they took us on board. We had to get mixing really quickly. I mean, another thing was we didn’t have a lot of money at that time, but when Goldie got signed, he bought us our decks. We’d had a fund, I think we’d got it up to about £250, so we at most probably could nearly afford half of one deck, and we came home one day and he’d bought us our decks. We didn’t really know what to do with them, and a couple of days later when Randall came around and watched us have a little mix and he said, “It might be easier if you take the rubber thing off.” Yeah, it was quite embarrassing, really, but that’s how we started, really, me and Kemi. We made a series of tapes that… I know a lot of people were making tapes at that time, but we decided to have a CV, and Goldie wrote it all in wildstyle, and he gave us a piece of artwork to put on the tape. My boyfriend worked at his father’s company, so him and Goldie would break in at night and copy our tape covers for free. Yeah, by any means necessary. Yeah, I suppose that’s how Kemistry & Storm were born. I mean, Kemi’s name was easy to come by. We spent a lot of time thinking about mine. We had lots of different thoughts. Deck Jammer, Sidewinder, Mix Matcher, and then… Torsten Schmidt So, basically every grime rave there ever was? DJ Storm Exactly. Then my friend said to me, “Oh, you’ve got quite a stormy nature.” So, we were like, “Kemistry and Stormy?” We were like, “Oh, no, Kemistry & Storm.” The other thing about that was, I suppose we didn’t want to show that we were women. We just wanted a name that seemed kind of unisex. I mean, not that we were feeling any kind of oppression being women, but we could see that there was only really one female DJ out there – that was DJ Rap. Yeah, like I say, we were incredibly lucky to be picked up by Reinforced, and we’d got a pirate radio show, something like three months after getting the decks, so we just had to practice and practice and practice. It was a graveyard shift, six until nine on a Sunday morning. You had to go take your decks and put your decks through this hole that would just kind of fit, and then the next DJ would come and bring their decks, and you take all your decks out. It really was pretty underground, and I think if you’re going go to those lengths, you know that you really want it. I think then, Kemistry & Storm started getting a little bit of notoriety, and obviously Goldie started making tunes with Reinforced, and people just used to say to us, “Do you know that crazy guy from Wolverhampton with the gold teeth?” And we’d be like, “No. Who is he?” You know what I mean? And then obviously people realized he was with Kemi. I suppose, because Goldie had that different confidence to us. I do think that’s definitely something I’ve learnt over the years, as a woman, that guys tend to have that bit more confidence than us. They go, “Right, I’m going to do something… let’s do it.” Whereas, I think women, we think about it a little bit more. Maybe you can overthink things. So, we learnt a lot by looking at how the guys were, and how they got work. We would watch our friend Randall, he’d talk to the promoter, and we were like, “OK, we can do this.” I have to say, we did get a lot of work off those promotional tapes. We’d turn up and they’d go, “Oh, you’re women.” We were like, “Yeah.” They were like, “Well, we can’t change it now.” That’s the thing that people want to see, I suppose, from a woman DJ, as opposed to a guy DJ, especially when it was quite a novelty then – that we can do the job. I think that was the thing about us – we were always able to do the job. We’d got our skills together and people started to say, “You’ve kind of got a style.” You needed a style then, because it was all about… you had the DJ here, and the producer here, and the producer provided the music, and the DJ played the music. There was no producer/DJ back at that time, it was really just pure DJs. Skills were really important and having a style. People started to say, “Oh, you’ve got this kind of rough with a smooth kind of vibe going on.” So, now we had a style. Once we’d had quite a few warm-up sets and our first residency… It took us six months to get into the next position of not warm-up, but that’s the best kind of grounding you can ever get, I think, is being a warm-up. There’s not many people there at the beginning of a dance, but if you can make them stay, and start to get them to dance, then you’ve done your job as a warm-up. Once you become a good warm-up DJ, then you can start to progress, and hopefully the promoter will come and listen to you. Not always, but back in the day we had some very good promoters that would listen to our tapes, and would give us advice about what to do, which I’m not sure is around now. Then, it was kind of important to us. We had residencies and slowly, slowly we started to get noticed. Yeah, you’ve got to say that, “Yeah, maybe we did look a little bit different. One black, one white. She’s got the blonde dreadlocks and I’ve got the dark hair. I think people kind of were a bit curious about us, like, “What are they going to be like?” Yes, we only got half the money each, because we were a unit as Kemistry and Storm, like Randall is a unit on his own, but that didn’t really bother us. Obviously, Goldie started the label, and we started to run that with him. That was amazing. Torsten Schmidt On the up note, you always had a travel companion. DJ Storm Of course. I have to say now, after all these years, and doing a lot of talks in the last year about being a female, I’m not sure if I’d have found it that easy on my own. We always had each other, and when there were problems, you always had someone to talk to. We could work it out together. I think we were quite blinkered as to being women, because we were just doing our thing. We didn’t really stop ourselves and we were lucky to get picked up by Reinforced. It was the hottest label, but once they booked us, then we had to deliver the goods, if you get my drift. Even though it was scary, and I’m always still a bit nervous now when I play… I think I would worry if I wasn’t a little bit nervous. But some of the gigs we got, it was proper panting, and sitting in the car, and, “Are we going to be okay?” You could turn to the other one, and it was easier. I have to say, it was easier having the two of us, rather than just the one of us. I suppose, since Kemi’s passing, I’ve lived that being on my own again, because I did have to kind of reinvent my career after she passed. There was work pending, but a lot of people did cancel the work, because I think they always thought that I was maybe … I don’t know, a lot of people said they didn’t want to see me upset, and that kind of stuff, and I suppose that’s a difficult one. If you met Kemi, as you know, she was a really unique individual. She had a certain glow about her. There was a certain glow about her, a certain golden-ness about her. I think she had a really old head on her shoulders, almost. She was very wise, and I was always the go-getter with the real confidence, and I think we were very yin and yang with each other, and that really worked. So, after she’d gone, it took me awhile to do this on my own. Of course, we shared one set of records, and we never played each other’s records. There was one Dillinja 12", she would choose one side, and I would choose the other. When we were going to cut stuff, you know dubplates, I would bring some stuff home for her and say, “I cut three tracks for you,” and she would do the same. We kind of knew, and I don’t know how we knew, but we did. My first gig back… obviously, after she passed, I had to play her records, which was really bizarre, because we’d never done that. I had a lot of support from the scene, I have to say. A certain guy called Bryan Gee just basically said, “Well, this is where you decide you really want this, and boy would she be angry if you just gave it up.” I said, “Yeah, she can haunt me and fling things at me, maybe dubplates, or something.” They’re quite painful, you know? Torsten Schmidt You don’t want to be slapped with a dubplate, no. DJ Storm Exactly. Torsten Schmidt Nevertheless, it’s something that gets rarely talked about, because everyone wants to be on a cover of a magazine, or on the loading page of whatever blog, and get a gazillion likes, and this, and that. At the end of the night, you’re going home alone most of the time. You’re there, and if you’re playing multiple gigs a night, you have to always get yourself back into that zone of being center stage, and then be like a very on-your-own kind of person. DJ Storm Yeah. I think we realized straight away that being a DJ is about being a performer. I mean, our first few gigs, I’d love to see some pictures of us, because we couldn’t look up for love or money. It takes a while to finally look up at the crowd, and make eye contact… OK, so you’re at home, and you have your radio show, but that’s very controlled, and you’ve got no one around you looking at you. When you get out on the stage, there are people looking at you, and then what happens is people want to come and ask you questions. You’re like, “Oh, OK, I’ve got to answer questions now.” I think that was again easy because there was two of us… I think a lot of people found us quite easy to get along with because you could just come and ask us questions, and we would tell you, you know? We weren’t precious like certain DJ’s that wouldn’t put the name of the track on a dubplate – and when we started to run Metalheadz… well, we’re trying to sell this stuff, so, we’ve got the name of the artist and we’ll tell you when it’s coming out, because we are going to release it. We know what the schedule is – you know what I mean? You start to realize then actually, yes, for that time you’re booked, you’re the performer, you’re the entertainment. And I think there was that moment there where the DJ kind of became the new live act, you know? There weren’t so many live acts around, and it was all about the DJ. Obviously, you had your big people like your Oakenfolds and Pete Tongs, and that was, I think, much more of a performance than we were doing on the drum & bass scene, but actually once you start to engage with the crowd, you see those people with their smiling faces feeling exactly as you’re feeling, and that’s a great feeling because now you know you’re able to transmit what you’re trying to say through music. And people used to always say to me and Kemi, you know, “Do you feel like you play for yourselves?” And we were like “Yeah.” And they’re like “Well that’s kind of selfish,” and we’re like, “Yeah, hang on a minute though. It’s what I would like to hear if I was out there as a punter.” Not “OK, I have to play because I work for Metalheadz, I’m just going to play Metalheadz.” That was not what we were about at all. We played every label, and maybe we did highlight… I mean we got Metalheadz stuff really early, so we were actually lucky, because dubplates were the thing then. It was what you had in your bag, as to how people would book you. It was important then – What kind of labels did you have in your bag and what artist did you have in your bag and have you got the hottest tunes. And when you were going abroad, you were kind of conscious of, “Well, we are trying to export this music from the UK right now, and we hope you get it.” I think a great DJ will always take you by the hand and walk you through their set. I think that is one of the best compliments you can ever get, it’s that, “I didn’t really like drum & bass before, but now I’ve heard you, you’ve made me understand it.” And you’d be like “Yes! Another convert.” Torsten Schmidt I mean, then, scarcity was actually a USP for you getting work, getting gigs. Now it’s rather the opposite and there is an abundance, an over-abundance of things. How do you navigate that? DJ Storm Well, I think it took me a long time to get my head around social media. A big DJ had a really good shout at me a couple of years ago, and just kind of put me in my place about it because I, maybe naively, didn’t realize how social media works. You know we had a very face-to-face scene years ago. We’d go to a place called Music House, where we’d cut our Dubplates. So not only would you see people from London, Marcus Intalex would come from Manchester to cut his dubplates. Roni Size would come from Bristol. You know Simon Bassline Smith would come from up north, in Derby. So, now you had this community [that was very] face to face. Everything was done on the phone. We had a fax machine, that was pretty much how you communicated back in the day. To kind of see the way social media has changed things and almost you see some artists now be packaged you know… they become… I think the producer/DJ changed a lot of things, because obviously when vinyl was really, big back in the day, when we started Metalheadz, you know, when we finally got established, we were maybe selling 50,000 to 75,000 pieces of vinyl per release, so the engineer at home was happy with that money. Now, when things changed, a lot of producers decided they needed to become DJs because they couldn’t get their money out of labels. It’s a very underground scene – there was never a lot of money around in our scene, only at certain points. You see drum & bass kind of go on a little bit of a roller-coaster every now and again. I think then once … It’s like Dillinger always said, “The worst thing I ever did was DJ, because the money was in my hand. And now I can’t turn my back on it, because getting my money for my release from this label or this label, maybe you never ever got it…” So, it was a way of, yeah… People grow up, they have children, you have to sustain a house and live. So, the producer/DJ was kind of born, and I think a lot of the DJs really got their noses quite out of joint a little bit, and I suppose, for me to sustain my career, I had to think differently when social media came along. Like I say, quite a big DJ had a really big shout at me, and told me kind of what to do and what it was all about. I kind of knew it, but I kind of resisted it because I’m very old-school. I mean obviously dubplates were no longer being cut, we’d moved on to CDs. It was a very different thing. You really didn’t have that dubplate any more, and I suppose we didn’t have this community where we all saw each other. We were now, I don’t know, talking on Facebook and talking on… What was the first thing we had? Torsten Schmidt MySpace. DJ Storm Yeah, MySpace. Yeah, Yeah Tom. Tom on MySpace. But there was a messenger thing that people use to use… Torsten Schmidt ICQ? DJ Storm Yes, exactly and I never used that. I never knew what that was all about… I suppose I’ve always been quite physical. I mean, even getting a laptop and having a smartphone was a bit much for me. And now I’ve embraced it – you have to; it’s a global thing now. I mean it’s interesting. I look at when Kemi passed, that’s what all we had – MySpace. I have two A4 books of faxes that people sent from all around the world to the Metalheadz office. Then I look at when Marcus Intalex passed last year – it was like overkill. I had to turn it off for a while, because it was almost too much, but the whole world did want to commiserate, of course. But I suppose what I don’t really get about social media, is the negativity behind it. I’ve always been quite positive, even if I’m feeling maybe angry about a subject and I’m doing an interview, I will still always be positive because I think that then translates to people that are reading the interview. I want you to come join our scene. I do think drum & bass is all-comers-welcome, and I want you to come out and feel comfortable. I think that’s been a different thing for me… If I have to say something and be controversial and I feel really passionate about it on social media, I will. But I kind of see it now for me as a business tool. I do think, over the years, I’ve realized that DJ Storm has her own persona and Jayne has her own persona, and lots of people can get to interact with DJ Storm, but not everyone gets to know Jayne. I’m definitely two different people. I’m definitely a performer when DJ Storm starts to happen. Don’t phone me and talk to me when I’m getting ready and doing my DJ Storm rituals. I’m not going to answer you, you know, because once I become DJ Storm, it’s all about being a professional, and it’s all about doing my best job. Whereas Jayne can have a little bit of fun and lark about… If you are able to spend time with me, and I think doing the Boiler Room really opened my eyes. Wow. There were people that hated me for the whole time I played. And I just didn’t understand it, do you know what I mean? But my friends just say to me “That’s just how it is now.” I mean one girl, she hated my lipstick, she hated my hair, she hated… I don’t know if anyone watched the Boiler Room thing, but they’d obviously asked me to do this final set, and then they hadn’t gotten a clue about the decks. Torsten Schmidt Well if it’s any consolation I was getting a fair amount of email of like, “Hey you RBMA people, get the fat c--t with the German accent off the stage.” And it’s like, “Thanks, you’re speaking to him.” I was like, “OK, all right…” DJ Storm Yeah sure, sure. I think doing Boiler Room really opened my eyes, because I had the most hits ever, and that to me was phenomenal, you know? I mean even Goldie phoned me and was like “Wow, you’ve got more hits than me.” And I said, “Yeah, I know!” Torsten Schmidt How’d you take that? DJ Storm Yeah well. I always act surprised. “Oh yeah, I’m so surprised.” And he was like “What happened there?” I said “Well, I’m not sure if it was just for me.” I think, obviously, the guy who booked me, Mumdance, he’s pretty famous. He’s got a massive following, and Different Circles, his label has got a huge following. It’s interesting, because I asked him “Why is it me that you’ve booked?” And he said “Well, I’ve got that story like you have about Groove and Fabio… You know, when I 15, I broke into Essential Festival at Finsbury Park, and the first DJs a saw were Kemistry and Storm, and you changed my life.” And I was like “Wow.” He said, all these years on, Tom, who works for his label, happened to work at my agency, and he was sitting in their office saying, “Oh yeah, I’ve just taken on DJ Storm.” Jack Mumdance was just, “Oh my God, I want her on Boiler Room.” So, they approached me and I said to my friend “Oh yeah, this guy’s asked me to do Boiler Room, what’s that all about?” And she’s like “Oh my God, do it, do it, do it, do it.” I said “OK.” So, I even walked into Boiler Room pretty naive. And then I saw it, and I was like oh my God, [the crowd is] really close. It was really close… Yes, and, of course, the deck didn’t work on the right so, my friend is saying to me, “Don’t forget you’ve got six cameras on you and three mobile ones,” and I’m turning round to her going, “For God sake, get me the sound man and screaming at her,” then turning around and [dancing and smiling]. Torsten Schmidt If we stretch away the shouting, what did that certain big-name DJ teach you that you would like to share with other people? DJ Storm Well, that I need to get my own Facebook page for DJ Storm, not just Jayne. And that I literally had to work it every month, put something on there every month, whether it was just a mix or… I mean, when you think about it, it’s a bit stupid not to realize that you can’t be booked unless somebody can hear you. I didn’t really think, because I’m a bit naive and bit ignorant about social media. I didn’t think about things like that, putting my set up and kind of encouraging people to come and listen to it, and having Mixcloud and Soundcloud, and all those kind of things. So, that DJ taught me a lot about… And even things like that, liking an event … I don’t know how many gigs I’ve got from liking an event and they’re like, “Oh my god is that really you, DJ Storm?” Well it’s like “Yeah…” “Can we book you? We haven’t got a lot of money but…” “Yeah, OK!” I mean I had those times in the last few years where my career’s not been great, and I’ve just really had to say to myself, “Do I still want this?” And I really do, I’m still as excited when I get on the decks as I first was. I don’t think that will ever leave me. My most comfortable place is in the mix. I love it, and I love creating things, and I love making tunes sound different, and that live mixing, for me, I don’t like tricks… Really what came out of drum & bass, I think, in the beginning, was mixing and blending. The cross-fader wasn’t used too much before drum & bass DJs came along, and we really took the live mixing of two tunes to another level. And I think if you’re going to do that, then mess around with it and have fun with it, and kind of create something so that you might be going along really calmly in your set, and then you just flip it, and it produces a “Whoa!” I don’t want to be easy on the crowd. I want to make you dance, of course – that’s the bottom line – but I want us to go on a little bit of a journey together, and I think putting sets up and those kind of things got me noticed again. But I have to say I think Boiler Room changed things for me in a big way. Because I wasn’t expecting it. And then all of a sudden, I think people are like, “Oh my God, is DJ Storm still alive? OK, let’s book her then. Is she still working?” And I think really, I’d done that to myself by not being part of the whole social media revolution, that was my mistake. And now, that was the best advice that DJ could have given me, to have something on that page, whether it’s an interview, whether it’s a podcast, whether it’s a mix. Every single month, there has to be something of interest, so that people can look at your page. That really helps, because people are looking at things all the time. I mean, it’s a minefield out there. I’ve just had to start Instagram now. I can’t do any more [laughs]. Torsten Schmidt How did you overcome, and how do you navigate it, so that it doesn’t get too much and you don’t feel like you’re giving away too much? Because, I mean, you literally grew up in a world where it was a lot about keeping your privacy, people would be performing with all sorts of masks a lot, and all these other things… DJ Storm Yeah. Well I think you have to be open to it. And I think you have to be happy about what you’re doing as well. And I think … doing a mix, I don’t think is a difficult thing to do – especially not for me, I love it, you know what I mean. I’ve looked at it as something exciting, rather than some chore. I think if I’ve gone that way, the “Oh, God, got to do another mix for Facebook, and meh, meh, meh, meh…” No, you’ve got to change your attitude. And if you want to be out there, it’s here now – there’s nothing I can do about it, it’s here, all these things are here. And I don’t want it to feel like I’m doing it just to progress my career. I feel like I want to enjoy it as well, so I think I’ve started to enjoy it. Torsten Schmidt But you’re clearly differentiating between you as the person and the product that you put out there. DJ Storm Yeah, I suppose I am to a certain extent, but I think … Torsten Schmidt How many times do you post the hotel food that you had? DJ Storm Now, that kind of stuff, I don’t do. I don’t understand that, when certain artists get up and they put a picture of their breakfast and go, “I’ve just had a lovely breakfast,” and I’m like, “Why did you do that?” Yeah, I don’t do that. And I mean, Randall when I played at Boomtown, he did a video for me. I didn’t do one… I mean I’m not great at taking … Maybe you can tell me, if I’m playing to you in the club, do you want to see the picture of that club later, the next day? You know lots of DJs take big pictures of the club, and thanks for playing. And, I mean, I would always, the next morning, thank the promoter, of course. That’s a personal thing between me and them, but do you want to see that? I don’t know. I can’t answer that question. Torsten Schmidt I guess there’s way too many pictures of us at five in the morning already anyway. DJ Storm Yeah. So yeah, you’re right… I do still see all of the social media sites as a business. Yeah, DJ Storm is definitely a business when she’s out there. I have two pages now on Facebook, Jayne Conneely and DJ Storm. And DJ Storm, the page tends to do the business, whereas Jayne Conneely, she might have a little bit of fun… Everybody knows it’s me, the picture is not that different, you know, maybe a few years apart. But I kind of quite like using them both now. Because I can have a little bit of fun with Jayne, you know what I mean? The one thing I really love is Twitter. That’s been my favorite one, because I quite like that instantness about it. And the drum & bass community really got behind Twitter. We really enjoy it. And now, obviously, everybody’s got behind Instagram, and I’m just kind of getting my head around it now. My friend put the app on three months ago, but she never taught me how to use it, so I’m kind of navigating my way. If you’re trying to follow me, I’ll get there eventually, OK? Just give me some time. Torsten Schmidt Well, the thing that you totally do get is your actual craft and the mixing. You’ve always been known for one of the most impeccable mixes out there and for building the drama of a set and all those things. How much time do you still invest in the actual craft? Torsten Schmidt For me, it’s more over the years it’s more in my head. The mixes. I still do that, I still dream of mixes, and then I get up the next morning and do them and go, “Oh yeah, that’s wicked.” You know what I mean? You know, you hear … whether it’s because I’ve been mixing for years now… I don’t know… It was funny because Digital has just remastered “Space Funk,” and he was asking me to do a little write-up for him, so I said, “Well “Space Funk” is quite funny, because… [Kemi and me]
would find mixes for each other every now and again, and “Space Funk” was quite a funny one because we both wanted it, and it was her turn to have the Digital 12". Of course, she went out one day and I think she kind of smelt something, that I wanted to get my hands on that naughty Amen track… Of course, she went out, and I heard her from the kitchen, coming back in and going, “Is that “Space Funk” I can hear?” And it’s all, “Oh Kem, sorry!”” I couldn’t resist. Digital laughed at that little story I told. And I think that was… again, we did understand each other’s vibe. There were those tunes that we knew we both could play, but we took it in turns, and that was interesting. But I still give as much to my craft as possible. I mean, I still try to work really hard on putting things together a different way. But I think after all these years, I do hear a lot more in my head of what goes together. You might have a busy week, where you don’t have a chance to mix. So, you go out with new tunes and pretty much normally they always work. And of, course, you can hear in your headphones if a chord is not going to work with another track, and then you have to rush for another tune and think, “Oh no, that definitely didn’t work, it worked in my dream last night, but today it’s not working.” And because I’ve always had that musical background, I can hear it straight away if chords are clashing, and I want my basslines to work as well. For me, it has to work musically all the way along. And, you know, I have to pull this face, when I hear another DJ chord-clashing – like I’m thinking, “Eeeugh!” Torsten Schmidt Speaking of listening to other DJs, do you find that mixing has changed with all the visual cues that devices like this [points to decks] provide? DJ Storm Well, lots of people go on about cue points now. And to a certain extent, I suppose … thinking about it I’ve had this debate with a few people recently. If there was a beginning that had nothing kind of going on, we would all still play it, and of course, you would rush to the beats – that’s the cue point – and then go back to the beginning. What happens now is that they don’t go back to the beginning, they just hit the cue point. I mean, I’ve discovered… my partner had Serato quite early, so… He’s a reggae DJ, and I’d learnt about cue points from him. I thought, “I don’t really need them…” I was having this debate with Spirit the other day, and he was saying, “Yeah, but if you got the cue point, at least it’s quick,” and I said, “Yeah, but when I think about vinyl, you could always see… “ That was the beauty of vinyl. You could see the cue point, so you could go straight to it pretty much. Yes, you’ve got to go to it a little bit here, but I would still always go back to the beginning of the tune. I’m still a great believer that because I don’t produce, I’m not going to start messing about with someone else’s tune. Now, I know with Serato, and with the USBs, I think you can loop sections. I’ve seen it done, but I don’t think I have the capability to do that. Like I say, I don’t produce, so I’m not then going to start to disrespect the tune that you gave me to play by messing about with it. I’ve heard a lot of sets where there’s so much looping going on, they never get to the drop. There’s no atmospheric space, and I still love that. I still want that. I’ve heard sets, and they just go, and go, and go, and they just come at you, and they just come at you. Obviously, you get a lot of – since the a producer/DJ – a set of tunes that maybe sound quite similar, because they’re their own productions. I think, when I hear that and 30 seconds of mixing, it doesn’t really impress me. I have to gloss over it because it’s here now, but I kind of maybe just think, “Oh, I’m ready to kill you in the mix, now.” [Laughs] Torsten Schmidt I guess that’s also a rather male approach, as well. Thinking that because I’m a DJ, AKA God, I can make your tune so much better, and that’s why I need to do an edit of it, and make sure only I know what your tune really sounds like. DJ Storm Yeah. I’ve heard that impression. I had a big debate with someone about this at SUNANDBASS last year. They do that a lot. They had heard that I wasn’t too happy about that. I had to explain to them that these are not my tunes. I’m lucky enough for these people to give me their tunes. They respect me enough to give me their tunes and hopefully I’m going to do a good job with them. That’s how I think. Still, if that producer walks in the dance, and I’m mixing, I get a little bit, “Oh God, I hope he likes it.” There’s another thing, it is mostly guys – what can I say – with production… I’m not sure what’s wrong with us ladies, but maybe we can touch on that a little bit later. This guy was saying to me, “Well, it’s my tune, and I start to think… I just want to change it right now.” I said, “Yeah, but are you looking at the crowd? Are you actually paying attention?” I always think that’s obviously the most important thing. Not everybody’s going to like every single track that you’re playing. I think, for me it’s a little bit easier, because I feel like I play a little bit of everything, so hopefully in the set somewhere, you’re going to hear a tune that really turns you on. I hear a lot of sets that sound very similar now. You can be doing all this trickery, but because the tunes sound all the same, I’m not quite sure what you’re achieving. I think it’s easy. This sound that’s around now is very easy. It has a lot of mid-range bass, and it has a lot of what I call the “wah-wah” sound. It’s a bit, “Wah-wah-wah, wah-wah-wah.” It doesn’t do a lot to me, because I think back to some of the early producers that have used that sound, and they’ve used it in a much more exciting way. Maybe there’s a glimmer of it, it’s not the whole theme of the tune. It’s become very mid-range. Well, drum & bass is about drum & bass. It needs to have bass. It’s not called “drum and mid-range bass”, it’s called “drum & bass”, and I want to hear that. That’s where I’ll be controversial. Some people have said to me in the last few years, “Oh, Storm, you don’t get it.” I said, “Well, I get it, I just don’t want to be bored when I’m playing.” I can’t play something that doesn’t move me in here. People say, “Well, yeah, but that producer’s really hot, and you should be playing their tunes.” I said, “Yeah, but if it doesn’t move me in here, then I’m being untrue to DJ Storm.” I don’t play things because they’re trendy, or because this producer’s hot. I play things that move me. So far, touch wood, I’ve never cleared a dancefloor. I’ve had to come on after some of these producers, and maybe the last three producers, to me, have all sounded the same. Then, I have to think very carefully about how I’m going to start my set now, because I can’t just … I think I play quite dramatically. When I look at a label like Metalheadz, you couldn’t say … Some people say it’s dark. Some people say… You can have lots of opinions about Metalheadz, but the one thing that Metalheadz had in its tunes was drama. There was a lot of drama, and tension, and even if it was a musical tune, it still had certain amounts of tension, and drama, and it painted pictures in your mind. That’s what I see. I still see pictures in drum & bass… I think, to a certain extent, that’s how I play. So, if I’ve come on after three, what I feel are quite flat sets, then I have to be careful. I can’t just go “Bam,” and just kind of bring you my drama straight away. I’ve got to work very carefully, so by the time I get to that point, where I really want to get quite dramatic… I’ve got to give you a few tunes… not those tunes that they’re playing, but my version of that, to a certain extent. Maybe something not quite so in your face. Then, I have to build to where I’m going. The other thing is, when you’ve heard sets like that, that don’t have a lot of music, I have to think now, “Does the crowd like music?” So, I might choose something that’s maybe a little bit older, that people know. Maybe a remix of something that was in the charts. We don’t do many of those, but we have a few… Once I’ve got you with a piece of music, then I realize, “OK, let’s go.” I have to think about my set much more carefully when I’m playing after, three sets that to me that have all sounded the same, I can’t just come in. I might scare you. Then, I might scare you out of the dance, and I don’t want to do that. So far, I’ve done a good job. Again, I think when you’re a DJ, you need to turn up early to hear what the DJ is playing before, and feel your range of where you’re going. Do you know what I mean? You still will play your tunes, but you might play them in a slightly different order that night just to… You’re always going to start your set and kind of show that you’re here. I think your start tune is incredibly important, as to how you’re going to stand on the decks and show you’ve arrived. I tend to keep start tunes for sometimes maybe three or four months, so that I come in and people go, “DJ Storm, she’s on.” Now, there’s not so many DJs with different styles. The producer/DJ, some of them are great, but some of them just tend to… like I say, it’s very minimal mixing, they’re not creating too much in the mix, it just goes along for me. I find that just a little bit boring, I want more than that. Back in the day, when you walked in the dance, I wouldn’t have had to see the DJ, I would have known if it was Grooverider, or Kenny Ken, or Nicky Blackmarket. Now, sometimes I haven’t got a clue. I don’t know, because the sets all sound the same. I can see that the sound … Thousands of people love it, because it’s selling. It’s just not for me, you know what I mean? Some producers get quite angry with me that I won’t play their tunes, but I can’t play something that doesn’t appeal to me. I can’t do that. I think that’s what makes me individual and I think that’s what makes a lot of real DJs individual … That they play what they feel. If I’m feeling it, then I can do something even more impressive in the mix with it. So, that’s how I feel about it. I hear a lot of this sound creeping into all labels. I was at a big festival earlier in the year, and I was with a guy from a really, really big label … That maybe I feel is probably a little bit commercial. He said to me, “What is your problem with this sound?” I said, “Well, when I think about how drum & bass came, and how it evolved, and the excitement of it, there really wasn’t a format.” You look at “Close Your Eyes” by Acen, it’s got a big piano riff, which is from house. It’s got a bit of techno in it, it’s got a bit of acid. It had no form or function, because I supposed everybody was experimenting with sounds. I suppose you have those times that are really exciting when a music is developing. I suppose that all these years, drum & bass is a little bit formatted. It has a beginning, a middle, and an end. I think, maybe back in the day, it was a little bit crazier. So, I’ve come from a time when there are all different styles, and I can’t really change that. I suppose if you’ve come up in the last few years, where the sound is maybe a little bit flatter, maybe that’s what you’re used to. A lot of DJs were pushed to the side a little bit, because the producer/DJ was where it was at. I do think that stuff is very easy. It comes at you. It doesn’t drop around you. It doesn’t make your head turn. I mean, when I think about some of Goldie’s first tunes, he could make a sound come from what felt right behind you, bring it to the front, and hit you in the face, and silly things like that. Photek going out with his DAT machine and breaking off branches and recording it – and then making a break out of it? Goldie loved the spinning of a coin, and it’s in his new album now. There’s a coin spin and he also had a glass smash. It was just more exciting, and I want my set to be exciting like that and … There is a place for all of it now. There’s a place for jump-up, which is a really big scene at the moment. There’s a place for, I’m not quite sure what you call the mid-range stuff, but there is a place for it. I think in the last couple of years, the DJ, especially with someone like DJ Randall, who’s really kind of come to the forefront, he’s made mixing more acceptable again. Now people are starting to book DJs again, but like I say, it goes in a bit of a roller-coaster. But like I was saying to this guy at the festival, he was saying, “You’re not interested.” I said, “You know what? Ten years ago, maybe even five, you could have given me 10 tracks and said to me, “Storm, place those at a label,” and I could have done it. Now, I couldn’t tell you because you’re all using the same sounds and I thought drum & bass was about being individual and making an impression, and having a sound.” I think all those old producers who are still there – and there are some new people who are influenced by them – they still have their own sound and there’s nothing wrong with that… Digital will still put effects on a break, which actually makes it harder to mix and it’s very two-step now. I want to hear an Amen break and I want to hear the Apache break. I want breaks on breaks on breaks. If I could have breaks and breaks and breaks, I’d just be a happy girl, and that’s what I try to do… To me, it’s exciting, and maybe to those others, my set is really boring. That’s fair enough. But I could do what you do. If you gave me your set, I could still make it sing. That’s working hard. You’d have to work hard to make that rise and fall with that sound, but I would do it if I had to, and show you how your tunes could sound because, for me, I’m the ultimate DJ. I want to be there in the mix and making things exciting. Yeah, I see people now. “You have to do this now, in 30 seconds, raise your hands.” I’m not saying I don’t raise my hands. I do sometimes. Do you know what I mean? But it’s taken a long time for me to raise my hands and be … you know what I mean? I see DJs do that now. Torsten Schmidt Well, I guess that’s been around for a minute, anyway. Speaking of raising hands, this is probably not the Bible or the Holy Koran or the Talmud or anything [reaches out and picks up a book from the couch], but there’s this book that I’ve always heard about, but never seen in the flesh, and I don’t know whether you ever put it out there in the first place. DJ Storm Yeah. I mean, Goldie desperately wants this book. Do you know what I mean? I suppose let me go and let you know how anal I am about my music and my scene. When we first started buying our records, all we had pretty much was a diary. I wrote down, I suppose, all the house and techno tunes we had then. Well, then I got a book. Me and Kemi wrote down every tune and what month we bought them in. This one starts in November ’91 and it goes up to ’97. It’s quite interesting because we didn’t mind filling this out because we loved it. The record shop that we used to go to used to have a book of promos and we were like… Torsten Schmidt What shop was that? DJ Storm That was Music Power and we thought, “That’s great. That’s fantastic. Look, they’ve got everything logged.” Do you know what I mean? That’s where it came from, and then we wanted everything logged. Before this, I do have a diary from ’88 and I was really obsessive then because you had lots of different mixes on some house things. I’ve even got the timings down of them, just really nutty. Do you know what I mean? We’ve written everything down and there’s my writing and Kemi’s writing. To be honest, I’m kind of glad I have it because when I’m asked to do a ’92 set, I can just go, “Oh, OK. What came out in ’92?”, and I can get it, really. Look. There’s Kemi’s writing, the record count to date… We had 761 records by then.” Torsten Schmidt The first track, “Last Train to Paradise,” is not technically a drum & bass tune… DJ Storm Yeah. Quazar was a kind of… What would you call it? A techno label? Torsten Schmidt Belgian Techno? DJ Storm Yeah. I mean, there’s lots of interesting … I mean, Warp really wasn’t a drum & bass label, and it developed into a kind of another label. And it’s interesting to look at this, because you can see how many releases there were per month – it was a lot. And as you go on, it gets less and less and less as the years and the months go on. And that’s interesting because I think, like you say, we drew from different things. Jumpin’ & Pumpin’ became something else and let me think, there’s R&S stuff in here somewhere. It’s interesting, some things in here are really silly… we’ve just got “Dubplate,” “White [label]”… I don’t know why we wrote in there. It doesn’t mean anything when I look back at it, but we’ve got all the original Metalheadz stuff in here, and it’s quite lovely to look at sometimes… I go back and reminisce and “Oh, remember what that sounds like…” and then I go and try and find it in my storage base of vinyl. It’s been an important book, really, and I love going back to it – this is when we started to play at Lazerdrome, when we kept all our stickers because you got a sticker every time you played. Torsten Schmidt Nice. DJ Storm I think I lived and breathed this scene and, I think, to a certain extent, people say “As a woman, do you have to work a little bit harder?” I’m not sure if you have to work harder, but I think you have to think a few steps ahead of yourself. “Where do I want to go?” And I do think that women overthink things a bit. We’re good at organization and, to a certain extent… one thing Kemi said that was really true, that men are brought up to put their energies into things, like their car. They might even give it a name and they’ll wash it, whereas a girl will go “Oh, as long as it goes, it’ll be fine.” Women are taught to put their energies into people, naturally we’re the maternal things. Now, Kemi and I made that decision years ago that we didn’t want children, but boy did we have some sons at Metalheadz. They were young and they needed guidance and we were that little bit older. We both had careers, so we were able to guide them and Goldie wanted this family. He never had his father around, and he wanted his extended family. I do think he became a father figure for two of them and I think Kemi and I definitely became motherly figures to them. And if they had problems in their lives, they could call us 24/7 and we’d be there for them. I think because we were that little bit older, that was easy for us. And I do think that’s how the Metalheadz family was born, and most probably the V family and the Moving Shadow family … We always said J Majik was our drum & bass baby. And I think this [book] is a lovely thing to have now… Kemistry and Storm were properly born 25 years ago, so that’s been quite pivotal for me, to think that I’m still here, and still loving it? That’s the one piece of advice I can give you – you have to know that you want it and – not that you’re prepared to do anything – but within reason, you’re prepared to do anything to get where you want to be. And it’s not always an easy road, and you have to be quite selfish. I’m not sure women are great at being selfish at times, but we have to. I’ve learned a lot from looking at the guys, because they do have that thing that… sometimes women hold themselves back a bit, whereas a guy will go “You know what? I’m just going to go for it.” And they do, and that’s brilliant. I think women are, “Oh, can I? I don’t know.” And I think you’ve got to get over that, and I think that’s most probably where there being two of us together helped. We had blinkers on, a little bit. Torsten Schmidt But I guess as far as confidence goes, any breathing human being can learn a thing or two from [Goldie]. DJ Storm Of course, of course. He was a force to be reckoned with, really. Torsten Schmidt How do you navigate this whole thing of when you say you get asked to play a ’92 set or so? Obviously, you are breathing this thing, you have been around all this history is within you, but you don’t want to be a museum relic… DJ Storm No. No. You have to draw a line between just becoming an old-school DJ, and yeah. I mean, there are old-school DJs who just play old school, and they’ve never moved on, and that’s fine, because hardcore – that’s still kind of existing… Those events are great to do. But I had to draw a line and say, “OK, I’m only going to do one organization.” I tend to do Moondance. The guy who runs that, he gave Kenny and myself our first residency, and I’m always happy to do something there. It’s bizarre, because you get a 45-minute set, and I really love playing around with old-school now. I love like playing clashing the eras, and in 45 minutes I’ve managed to go from 1992 to 1998… You have to be really careful when you’re doing that kind of set, because you have to know at some point there’s going to be a rewind. You have to bank on it, because you need to pull up the speed. I quite enjoy messing about with old-school now, instead of just playing a straight set. Obviously if I’m asked to do a ’92 set I will try and stick into the ’92 parameters as much. As you can see [points to book], in ’92, there was lots of stuff to go for, so again I like messing about with it now. And I think for me… because they asked me to do an old-school set at Boiler Room, I had loads of requests to do old-school sets and vinyl, and you have to just balance it out, because I don’t want to just be seen as an old-school DJ, even though I’ve still got my storage space and all my records, and I can go and get them… Torsten Schmidt But I mean it’s kind of interesting, especially a genre that was so much priding itself on being about futurism, the next level, trying to reach new plateaux, trying to figure out what the technology can do, then becoming a stalwart. It’s almost, when we were kids, we looked at The Who singing “Hope I die before I get old,” and, all of a sudden, we’re past 40. So, they still sing it way past 60. So how does the crew around you navigate all that? DJ Storm Well, the other thing as well, obviously as we all know, I’m totally affiliated to Metalheadz, and sometimes, if I’ve got, say, a two-hour set, which is a lovely thing to have and a rare thing to have, people will ask, “Well, can’t you just play “Metropolis”?” And I will, but like I say, I like to mess about with it now, and make it a little bit more interesting, because those tunes were very dramatic, anyway. So, I like to do that. It was interesting when I played the last set I ever did with Marcus Intalex, actually – we played at Recycle in Berlin, at Gretchen, and I think it was 20 years of Recycle, and they’d asked him to do a Soul:ution set, and they’d asked me to do a Metalheadz set. Now in the last few years, things have changed a little bit in Gretchen, because it’s a big club and you’ve got to fill that place, so it tends to have a few more… not commercial commercial nights, but certain artists that you know, the kind of neurofunk thing that appeals to a certain crowd. So, I suppose Marcus and I hadn’t played in there for a while and they’d asked us to do this old-school set. Now pretty much every time I play “Metropolis,” people will know it, and they didn’t flinch in Gretchen… Marcus went to me “Ooooh, what are we going to do?” I said, “I’ve got no idea, but we need to make these people dance.” He was like, “Right, come on…” So, we just sat there and we thought about it, and we were like “OK, right, right, let me try this, let me try this.” We were determined… We weren’t, “Oh, to hell with this crowd, then.” At the end of the day, they paid money come and see me, too. I’m a great believer in earning your money, you know what I mean? So, I did my next one, and I got them a little bit more, and Marcus was like “I know, this one will work”… and slowly, slowly, slowly we got them… It was quite fascinating because Marcus was over there on USBs, and I was on vinyl, and I didn’t realize that we’d got two mixers – he’s the producer and engineer – so, the next minute, I’m mixing and he’s mixing on top of my mix. So, he was like, “Oh, we’re like Orital – we’ll, we need to get glasses…” Torsten Schmidt Well, he had the glasses. DJ Storm Yeah, he’d got the glasses, yeah, but we didn’t have the lights… So, it was intriguing to think, “Wow, I’ve always felt that even if you don’t know the Metalheadz stuff, they stand the test of time,” and all of a sudden it didn’t. It was a little bit shocking, you know what I mean, and then we looked at the crowd and we were like “Wow, OK,” but we were determined to get them. And we did by the end of set, so we were happy. Torsten Schmidt But as far as longevity goes, when “Metropolis” came out, someone who’s been playing Ibiza Records or Tom & Jerry records or a DJ Seduction record or whatever, was already considered old old school. That is 20 years ago now. DJ Storm Yeah. Torsten Schmidt And still people were old enough to still feel that youthful spirit and be invincible and think nothing would ever happen and so on. And now we’re talking… I mean that was the second person that has left us already, who we just talked about, who contributed vast amount of creativity to the scene… DJ Storm Of course. Yeah, yeah. Torsten Schmidt And how do you navigate this – I mean it is about finding your path in the end. How do you deal with this when you’re planning your year out? When it’s Tuesday afternoon and you’re like “OK, what do I want to do in the next six months and so on?” DJ Storm Well, I have to say for me things have really rolled out quite well since the Boiler Room. I do think that did a lot for me. I mean 250,000 people had watched it by the morning, and I do think it kind of reinvented me a little bit, because, like I say I wasn’t great with the social media, so maybe people thought I’d given up or I just wasn’t doing it anymore or whatever, so to a certain extent the thing that I didn’t really understand kind of saved me. And it didn’t come from my scene. It came from a guy who was inspired by me. And I kind of like that… it gave me a platform that I don’t think my scene would have ever given me. I know certain people have done Boiler Room, but I’d certainly never been invited. But I do think that – and like I say, I have worked hard building up my career with little events and watching what’s going on on Facebook and just liking things, and people going “Oh could we book you? We don’t have a great amount of money.” And that’s the other thing. It’s not always about the money. It really isn’t… and especially when you’re trying to kind of build yourself up again, you may have to take a drop, but I’ve never felt it’s about money. I think when I was first coming over here [to Germany], for example, the wages were quite high and this country was… you could do seven-day tours over here. What’s happened to that? Some of the promoters I know, they’re older, they had their families, and they’re not doing it any more, so you kind of have to wait for the next younger person to come into that territory and hope that they discover you, because they’re into all the newer producers. So, it’s taken time again to kind of let people know who you are and, like I say, I’ve just hit people up now, and I’ve never been – I think because I’m from the old school where you phone people to get a gig, I don’t mind doing that. People say, “Oh God, do you not get ashamed?” I mean, I remember having to say to one promoter who was really, “Oh, I don’t know,” you know, I said “Come on, I played for you for years, and you haven’t booked me for years.” “Yeah, but you know.” I said “Alright, this is my deal, and this is my bottom line really. Book me. If I clear the dance floor, don’t give me the money. But if I don’t, give me a repeat booking.” And I said that to a girl, and she said, “Oh my God, did you really have to do that?” And I said, “I really don’t care what I have to do to get there…” I said, “You don’t think the guys are doing it all the time? Of course they are. They’re hitting up that promoter and going, ‘What about me?’ But because they maybe put it in a slightly different way than me, maybe more of an aggressive way, the promoter will give in. Whereas I approach it slightly differently, you know?” I think that’s a good way of saying it, “If I clear your dancefloor, don’t give me the money.” That’s it, isn’t it really? Yeah. So, I think for me in the last few years, I’ve just been following a lot of different things and I suppose I’ve been in the right place at the right time. I played Norberg Festival a few years ago, and I met a young lady called Nina – who I’d heard of her and I’m pretty much sure I met her years ago – and she was like, “Oh, I’m doing the Golden Pudel club in Hamburg.” I hadn’t been to Hamburg for years, so that was interesting, and then the guy who booked me last week in Geneva, he was at the same event, and he’s waited this time to come and get me and he finally got me, so even those chance moments, you know I do think some of your career is chance, you know, and you’re in the right place at the right time. And I don’t know why that happens. Maybe that’s fate, I’m not sure. But I think because I do my job with integrity as well, people can see that, you know, and again it can’t be all about the big bucks and the big wages, but if you want it, you’re prepared to do those things. So, I could do a lot of things for friends, who are starting out. They’d say, “Oh, you know I’ve only got this much money.” And I’d say, “Yeah sure. Why not?” It was the same as I suppose, Feline [the female-centered drum & bass night]. If I wasn’t going to do it, who was? You know, because before, female nights had seemed tacky. And I still see women say today … Even in the article that was done from Clare from Red Bull in England, she was saying, “You know, certain DJs had said, ‘Oh you know I don’t really want to do female nights.’” Why not? I’m not ashamed to do a female night. I’m happy to do a female night. Why not? You know, I’ve done lots of female nights in the last few years, where, abroad, there’ll use me as the headliner and they’ll bring in all their local DJ’s. Why not? Why shouldn’t I be supporting them? If not me, then who? You know, I am the first lady of drum & bass, and I should want to encourage the ladies, because I understand how hard it is. And especially abroad, in Europe… in England at least there’s a big scene set, but it’s not always the way. And I hear them, and they’re great DJs. I heard a girl, playing in Zurich, the other week, and she’s still playing vinyl, and her set was sick really. It was a really interesting set to hear. I’m so glad, you know… she might not have moved on from a certain era, but she’s doing it really well, and she had every right to be playing, and the crowd were going crazy for her. I don’t shy away from the female thing because… well, I am one, and, at the end of the day, you know, as for Feline, it was the first point in time, where I had enough DJs that I could do something monthly, and not just have the same five girls. I think we had seven or eight or nine of us. And I was able to share that kind of love around a little bit. And they were all great DJs, so I could just rely on them to do their job. I didn’t have to worry about them, and they all turned up on time. None of them were ever late. When we went abroad, they were up in the morning. No having to get the DJ out of bed or leave [them behind]… Torsten Schmidt No naming other names. DJ Storm No, no, no. But it was interesting… I was playing in Leeds on Friday, and one of my dearest friends from the scene came up to me, afterwards. Again, I’d been asked to do this specific Metalheadz set, and he said to me, “You know what, you’re the only girl in this whole scene that mixes like a guy.” And I said to him, “Wow, do you know what? That’s the most sexist thing you’ve ever said to me.” And he was like, “Oh no, I didn’t mean it like that.” I said, “I’m going to use that in Red Bull in a couple of days, OK?” You know, I won’t name him but… Torsten Schmidt I wasn’t going to say anything… Torsten Schmidt He didn’t mean it like that. But that comes out of peoples’ mouths. And I think what women do, is then sometimes go, “Oh my God…” I was doing this interview. When was it? About three years ago, me and another lady and she was saying, “Oh I’m really pissed off about what someone put on Facebook. This guy put, ‘I can’t wait to go and see these ladies do their thing tonight. And it’s going to be lovely because they’re more attractive.” She said, “How sexist is that?” I said, “Well he’s right. I’m going to have a little lipstick on, a little bit of an outfit.” And I said, “You see, if you get kind of pushed back by those kind of things… I wouldn’t sweat the small stuff.” That kind of thing is absolutely throwaway to me, after all these years. I don’t look at it like that. And you know a lot of women feel like they’re left out. And I think… even last year. I got a lot of festivals for the first time. Well, instead of going, “Oh finally. Thank God they booked me.” I was just like, “Oh I’m really excited. I’ve got Audio River in Poland. I’ve got Field Maneuvers. I’ve got Boomtown. I’ve got Shambhala.” It was exciting. I did a great job, everybody loved me and it was fantastic. People might say, “Oh well, you’re a bit naive.” I say, “Well, it’s done me good to be consistent, being positive about things, rather than having all the negativity about being a woman.” I don’t think you need to be negative all the time. Yes, it’s tougher. But I mean, now we’ve got Kyrist. Now she’s producing. And she’s coming like crazy. You know what I mean? And I’m not sure… we have Mollie Collins too, I suppose, who’s disproved the fact that I always thought, “I’m not sure if you can just come as a female DJ,” but she has. And it’s interesting to watch her rise. OK, to a certain extent, she’s been a little bit packaged, but she’s doing a good job when she gets there. And Kyrist is interesting, because she’s making this stuff… I don’t really play this kind of stuff, but she’s doing it really well. And now the boys are like, “Oh God, have you heard Kyrist? Her production skills are really good…” So that’s all encouraging, at the end of the day, that, finally, women… I mean again you could say to me, why haven’t you produced? And I can’t give you an answer, really. I don’t know. I mean, Digital’s definitely going to make me come into the studio this year. So, we shall see. I think that’s most probably a fear for me, because I’ve never been the most technically orientated person. It’s like we’re talking about today, that I’m still on CDs. I haven’t gone to USBs yet. I know I’ve got to do it. But I’ve never wanted to be a knob-twiddler. I want to, you know – I’m a bit physical when I play. So, I’m going to have to learn a way to be physical as well as doing that. You know for me… I sent a really angry message out to Pioneer when they started doing this [points to CDJ]. I said, “Why are you taking the art out of my mixing ability?” You know, at the end of the day, I want to be able to do something physical, whereas this USB thing seems a very producer kind of thing. I don’t know, I could be wrong about that. But to me, it seems more production than throwing something in and playing it. You’ve got to load it all up, you’ve got rekordbox… and then you twiddle knobs and go back. That’s the key apparently, the back button. Yeah, so I’ve learned that one already. But I know I’ll have to do it at some point, because there is now piece of equipment that doesn’t come with a hole for CD’s any more. So, I’m going to have to do it at some point. Torsten Schmidt As you mentioned that Boiler Room spot being such a turning point, if you don’t mind … If we could go back a few months maybe before that. Can you remember what you felt like then and what you felt about where you were going artistically? DJ Storm Well I suppose before then, that year… I suppose hadn’t been… Let’s go back a little bit before that, because by then I’d managed to get my career a little bit more solid. But again, you have to look at those kind of things. My agency’s huge now. You know? It’s a kind of big animal now, my agency. And it has, you know… ESP originally was about very pure DJs – Marcus Intalex, Klute, myself, Reinforced were on there. And as time’s gone on and they’ve had families, and they’ve had to buy a house, and they’ve had to pay their rent and their mortgage and whatever else, it’s grown into a huge thing. I suppose I felt a little bit lost there and a little bit forgotten. Then Marcus left and Dom left and Tom left. And I had to sit and really think, am I at the wrong place now? Are they not respecting me? You know, and I went to Marc after Kemi, and I brought a lot of stuff to the table, if I’m honest. You have to have those really frank talks with your agent at times about, “Can you support me? Am I viable on this agency?” You know, they’re really serious things to think about, and you don’t want it to be true, that you’re kind of lost somewhere when you’ve worked really hard all those years and you’ve actually brought a lot to the table. A lot of those original DJs, I encouraged to come to that agency and they were feeling the same, so they left. So, I had a really frank talk with my agent about it. And I’ve always wanted to be loyal to him because he’s done an amazing job for me over the years. But I felt… yeah, I felt lost in the scheme of all those people who were more producer/DJs, and maybe on a slightly more commercial tip than I’m on. Do you know what I mean? They brought in someone to deal with that underground – he actually wanted to keep it. And it’s interesting isn’t it, because that was Tom, who got me to Mumdance. So, was it fate? I do think that it was, a little bit. And I think that before that, though, I started getting a lot of my own work. I would say my own work was more 70% what they were getting, and I was doing it by hitting people up on Facebook, looking at who’s around in Europe… I don’t know if I could go and do just a day job any more, after all the years I’ve been in this business. I still truly love it and it’s my passion. You know, I’ve always said to Goldie, “When are we going to stop?” He said, “Well Rodigan’s the benchmark, isn’t he?” Once Goldie said, “Even if we’re got a Zimmer frame or something… as long as we can go like that and like that [makes mixing gesture], we should be all right.” I said, “Yeah but will we be able to hear?” Goldie said, “We’ll just get one of those old trumpets, you know, from like years ago, put it on the monitor…” [Laughs] So, we’ve got ways around it. But yeah, it was a tough time. Those couple of years before that, I wasn’t… I’d maybe have a couple of months where I wasn’t doing any work, and it was really worrying. Torsten Schmidt And did you consider it calling it quits? Torsten Schmidt No. I just had to think. Sit down, think about all the contacts I’d got over the years. “Right, who can I hit up? Who can I hit up on the phone first. Who hasn’t booked me for a while.” Then you go on to Facebook and you look at all the events. “OK, OK, OK, OK…” And you start… I suppose I devised a little plan, really – which is how, I suppose, me and Kemi built our career in the first place. I think, because I’ve got those skills… and like I say, I think women do block themselves – “Oh, I can’t go and ask for work, that’s like begging…” Yeah, I’m going to go and ask for work, because I haven’t got any. I think you’ve got to do that. It’s an institution like Fabric, who hardly book me, and when they do, they want me not to work in London for three months around here. I’m like, “Hang on a minute Fabric. I’m a prostitute of music. I can play it wherever I like, at the end of the day. You don’t dictate to me where I’m playing.” I really don’t like that attitude, and it’s most probably why I don’t get booked there any more. At the end of the day, I’ve done my time in Fabric. I’ve played there. I’ve ticked the box. Yes, it would be nice to play there, but … I found it interesting them doing the Smirnoff thing that they tried to do with women. It felt a little bit contrived. Number one, Smirnoff wants to sell alcohol to you at the end of the day. I had to ask the question of Fabric… They were asking all these questions about outing festivals and saying, “You’ve only got this percentage.” So, I emailed them, and I said, “Well, after 18 years, what’s your percentage? Because you’re not making that clear.” And I know that I was one of the only females that worked in Fabric. I think only Metalheadz were able to have two of us on the lineup. There’s the other thing that’s difficult for women… Why will they only let one through? Why can’t you have two on the lineup? Then you get precious about saying “All-female lineup”. Well, it is all-male lineup, normally. But we don’t worry have to say that. It’s almost like as women, we have to … I’m not sure what the answer is sometimes. But I know for me … just like reaching out to people, old promoters, new promoters – and again, maybe I hadn’t done my homework for a bit, and I really needed to get on it – but there was never a thought of doing anything else. No. I just had to work hard and go back to basics. I think sometimes you have to go back to basics. As long as you feel like you’ve still got the goods and you can still do the job, then I think you’ve just got to push, push, push, and that’s what I did for a while. I think my agent was really noticing that – that I was getting more work for myself than they were. That, of course, doesn’t go through their books and I had to say that to my agent, “If I’m getting all this work, I’m not then going to turn it over to you for 15%, when I’ve made the deal, booked the flight, whatever else.” That’s why I think it made him… and because he lost a few people in a very short space of time – and he is a good guy – I think he does respect my loyalty. He sent me some flowers the other day, a bottle of wine and a box of chocolates, saying, “Do you realize it’s 20 years today, since you came to the agency.” And because I’ve turned it around, he respects me now… I made a deal with him a long time ago saying, “Look, I’m getting smaller work now, I can’t give you that 15%.” So, we made a deal of a top line of money. All the other guys were like how is he doing that with you. And I said, “Because I’m not screaming and shouting at him. I’m just talking to him. Whereas you’ll come on the phone, “Where’s my f---ing work?’” I don’t deal with him like that. I say, “We need to have a serious chat.” Because I moved out of home a few years ago to look after my mother, I wasn’t face-to-face with him, which I would have love to have done, we had to have a serious chat on the phone. Because he still wanted to keep me, we made it work… I remember me and Kemi after… we had Innovation – this is our first residency, and we’d been there for a few months, and we got 25 quid. That was our wages. And after about three months, we were like, “Do you think we can ask to go up to £30?” And we were like, “What if he doesn’t book us any more?” And we felt, “Oh my God, it’s just going to take a lot for us to say this,” but because of the way we approached the guy, we actually got £40. We were really excited now. We’d actually got more than we thought. I think, again, there’s certain ways to approach things. And, yeah, we say there’s competition for the ladies. But God, there’s competition between the guys as well. How many more people have come in the last year? When I think about how many people that Kemi reached. You think about, when Marcus passed, how many more people he’d reached. And how many more territories he’d traveled to. I think for us, because of K7, the [DJ Kicks] album, we actually got to places that most probably people wouldn’t have got to in that time of their careers. And why K7 picked us? I don’t know, but they hunted us down for two years, and that was amazing. People say – this is not my words – people say it’s one of the best drum & bass mixes of all time, and when I go back and listen to it, I think, “Yeah, God, we worked really hard on that.” It was the first time that we played each other’s tunes, because we had to. We couldn’t do a run of things without it… Kemi would get to a certain point, we’re like, “Oh, OK, you’re going to have to use one of my tunes that’s going to fit in there.” If anybody can tell me who’s doing what in the K7 mix, I’ll give you a copy. I’ve got about ten at home. If you ever want to email me that, or hit me up on messenger. Torsten Schmidt Well … all of that in the end, gave you a reign as the first lady of this genre longer than Angela Merkel’s, which is probably… DJ Storm Oh, controversial. She’s a nice lady, right? Torsten Schmidt She does a helluva job, and I don’t want to have her job… DJ Storm Yeah, exactly. A poor Theresa May… But yeah, I suppose it does come with responsibility as well… I was having this conversation for the Red Bull thing, and the lady was saying to me, “You’ve always helped the females. You’ve always tried to encourage them.” And of course, I said, “Yeah, but I do that for guys, too.” I’ve never gone all, “Well, because you’re a female, I have to help you.” But normally, obviously females feel that they can approach me, and that’s great. I’m glad that they feel I’m open to talk to, because I’ll try and encourage you as much as I can, because I know it’s a tougher road… I did the #NormalNotNovelty thing in Leeds for Red Bull. I met some lovely girls up there, and people have already started sending me mixes, so that’s great. One girl had a plan. She’s going to go on a cruise ship for two years … earn some money. She’s taking her decks with her, and the first year there, she’s just going to get her skills together. Then, she’s going to start sending out mixes. Hopefully, by the time she’s come back from the cruise, she can start getting work. See? You have a plan, you want it, you’re seeing ahead… that’s the way to do it. You need to go a few steps ahead of yourself for guys or girls. That can work. And I think women plan… Kemi and I did for sure – we definitely tried to plan a few steps ahead. But I suppose for us, again, Metalheadz, Goldie, Timeless, Reinforced… we did have a few advantages that other people didn’t. I can’t say it was all down to us. But, even with Metalheadz, when it first started, I couldn’t book us every time. I see that happening a lot more with labels. Where the label manager will book themselves. I couldn’t do that. I very much did hierarchy lineups, when it came to the Blue Note. Kemistry and Storm for Metalheadz were the warm-up for quite a long time, because we had other DJs, who were our peers, who needed to be part of that… Doc Scott, Randall, Grooverider, Fabio… they were above us, Peshay, all those kind of people who were first there at Blue Note. But that was interesting, doing lineups, and I realized I’ve got a skill for that as well. That was great. That worked hand in hand with Metalheadz. I was able to do the lineups really easy. I did Goldie’s first Metalheadz tour. Again, we were again lucky. London Records gave us their mailing list. They wanted our mailing list, and we were like, “OK, yeah.” And they were like, “OK, you can have ours.” “Oh, thank you.” That was invaluable to us – who knew that was going to happen. And obviously, people at the time were having problems being signed… Goldie was like, “I don’t want to let the scene down. I want my girls to come in and meet Pete Tong and all the people at London Records who were doing my promotion, because I want them to have it first.” We had his album for, I think it was four months, before London took it on. We went into this big meeting at London Records, and there were people with books and pens writing things down that we said. We were like, “I don’t know. We don’t know. We’re just doing what we do.” And again, of course, that clever move that Goldie made giving them Metalheads with an “s”, and we were Metalheadz with a “z”. It was a brilliant thing to do, because everybody thought we were just one big company… and all those things would come through our door. The next minute Laurence Fishburne wanted stuff for his movie, then we had beer commercials, and all kinds of things that other labels didn’t have. In one respect, yes, we were a novelty. And we were the first female duo to come out of it. But we had a lot things that happened by fate, I suppose… I suppose meeting Goldie. That was a game-changer for us. And I’ll always give him that. And I think to a certain extent watching him in action… It was like the dubplate thing. So first of all he embarrasses us with Reinforced, yeah? And then he takes a dubplate to Grooverider and comes back and says, “Oh, Grooverider is really angry with me.” And we’re like, “Oh no, what have you done?” He said, “Well, I took the dubplate to him to play and then tried to take it back, like a soundsystem, right? You take it back…” I said, “And what did Grooverider say to you?” “That’s mine now. I played it. That’s mine now. You go and cut another one, young man.” “Yeah, but I haven’t got much money.” “Well, that’s your fault.” We were like, “Oh Goldie, you’re mortifying…” But he thought that’s what you did… “Well, that’s what you do in reggae.” We said, “Yeah, yeah, this is drum & bass. Once the DJs touch that and played it, that’s theirs, yeah.” “25 quid!” he was like. I was like, “Yeah, you better get your money out.” Torsten Schmidt Speaking of planning and scheduling … as you can see the lady’s very approachable and will stick around for a bit. But our schedule is actually moving on very soon so we’re going to have another conversation here starting in 10 minutes or so. We would like to give everyone a break, but not without giving a very, very big hand to DJ Storm. [applause]

---

Title: Carlos Maria Trindade
Date: 2018-05-09
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/carlos-maria-trindade/

Carlos Maria Trindade
Carlos Maria Trindade is a musician and producer who found his voice in the tumultuous aftermath of Portugal’s revolution in 1974. As part of bands such as Corpo Diplomático, Heróis Do Mar and Madredeus, Trindade learned to adapt the rock sounds to Portuguese language and sensibilities before exploring the intersections of experimental, folk and ambient music, beginning in 1991 with the now cult album Mr. Wollogallu alongside Nuno Canavarro.
In this public conversation as part of the Lisboa Electronica festival, Carlos Maria Trindade detailed his experiences growing up in ’60s Lisbon, how he learned to express a Portuguese identity through music and what led him to venture further into a world of sound.
Hosted by Lauren Martin Thank you very much for coming to this lecture today in this beautiful theater. This is a lecture, a part of Red Bull Music Academy’s time at Lisboa Electronica. We thought it would be appropriate to have someone who has been a part of a rich and varied heritage of Portuguese music history, from pop and rock music, music that you might have bought on singles and the charts at the time, seen and performed in front of live audiences. And then also, more esoteric and international music. Music that is part of a cult record that we will be speaking about in detail today. Please help me welcome Mr. Carlos Maria Trindade. Carlos Maria Trindade Thank you. Lauren Martin Hello. Carlos Maria Trindade Hello. Lauren Martin Good. You’re working. You’re with me. So, let’s go all the way back to the start. Tell me a little bit about what it was like growing up in Portugal as a young man in Lisbon, and what kind of sounds and what kind of music you were hearing on the streets at that time. Paint us a picture. Carlos Maria Trindade I was in the ’60s, when I was a young kid. We were living under a dictatorship, so my remembering of the country is a closed country, closed upon itself. There was nothing coming from the outside. The music, you had to get it to go to London or to go to New York to get it and to listen to it. There was one radio program called Radio Orbital, which was very good program that would show you the new things coming out in London. They would play the whole record, not just one track or the other. They wouldn’t talk in the middle. They would have a text in the beginning, and then you would know the whole record. This was very didactic, very pedagogic for a kid like me. The only thing we listened at the time was folk music, which was patronized by the government. Fado of course, which was our urban culture of music. You had rural folk and urban fado. That was about it. Then you had the big influence of Mediterranean music like chanson française. Let’s say our mothers listened to chanson française, to the Italian music. Very much. Even the Spanish music was very popular, romantic Spanish music or the flamenco or this kind of formats. But we were avid of going further, the new generation. Because we had listened to the Beatles. We had listened to this hippie movement and this Woodstock thing. But it was all very blurry and very distorted. The regime considered it a revolutionary thing, a dangerous thing. It would bring drugs into the country, bad habits, you know? It was very limited, as you can see. It’s not like today, where you have the internet and you can put “The Beatles” and you have all the records, all the images. It was a completely different world. This is my remembrance. But things changed in ’74, as everybody knows. We had the revolution. The dictatorship was overthrown. We could finally have a confusion in the country. People were discussing ideas for the first time, political ideas, philosophical ideas, musical ideas. It was interesting, because Lisbon became a potpourri of a million influences that were restrained up to that moment. I’ll give you an example. I was at the conservatoire studying piano, because my musical tuition is classic. I come from the classical world. The conservatoire, all of a sudden, the master of the school was dismissed. There was no direction. It was a bit of a chaos, of an anarchy. From that anarchy, direct meetings of people, musicians, started workshops, starting improvising together. People with different influences. The conservatoire became a kind of workshop school. I started then meeting other musicians from different tendencies and this is what opened my world. Lauren Martin When you spoke about bands like the Beatles, international influences and the tide of new music that was coming in, being exposed to music from the outside is being able to absorb another culture. But what changed about Portuguese music necessarily in that time? You were describing the more rural type of folk music and then the more urban kinds of music. Apart from being a young person and being overwhelmed and excited by new music from outside of Portugal, what influence did that swell have on music actually made in Portugal at the time? Carlos Maria Trindade It changed all the structure of the music world, of the show biz. Because we didn’t have live music room. We didn’t have PA systems. We didn’t have managers. We didn’t have technicians. We didn’t have video clip knowhow. All of a sudden we had to make everything. Not only the group, but build the management. Build the roadies. Start to build everything around us. To structure so that we wouldn’t fall into a chaotic thing, you know? I remember going with my keyboards to the north of the country, and there was no stable electricity. I had a roadie. I was playing, and you have the memories, right? That change the sounds. As the electricity was not stable, the sounds kept changing. So I had the roadie. He was down on his knees. He was putting a finger on my preset, so that my preset wouldn’t jump. I remember this. Also remember playing without a PA system, just like... Lauren Martin How did that work exactly then? Carlos Maria Trindade It was a fair sound. You know, like you have this fairgrounds with this tiny sound, rough sound. No basses, nothing. We played like that in those conditions. Without lights, without the stage, without catering. We wouldn’t even talk about catering of course. Lauren Martin I think if there’s no lights you’re not too worried about catering, right? You’re playing in the dark on the floor. Carlos Maria Trindade If there’s no sound, you wanted a sound, you know? Electricity. The country was not prepared for electrical music, right? That’s the conclusion. Electrical music, as you know, is difficult. Because to have a sound with quality, you have to have a good technician, a good play system, and a good room, right? We hadn’t. We had to start, you know... I think that’s why punk was so popular in Portugal, because punk didn’t need much. You just need three chords on the guitar, a bit of noise, and to make a social charm. Like giving your message, rough message, then go away. Lauren Martin What was that message at the time if you’re drawing inspiration from punk? Carlos Maria Trindade I wasn’t a punk, but I played with punk musicians. That’s where I got really interested in pop music, was the new wave movement. The post-punk. The punk... I came from the classical music, so the punk seemed to me too basic, musically. The message was interesting because it was revolutionary, but the music was too basic for me. It was three chords and they’re all the same chords. You change the rhythm. That was it. When post-punk came, like new wave... New wave is not a movement, it’s a big scene where many things can put in, you know? You can put ska. You can put reggae. You can put the Clash, but you can also put the Police, you can put lots of styles in there. That’s why it was interesting. It was not a closed style. I got interested in new wave, and that’s where I got invited to enter this Corpo Diplomático. It was the first group, not professional still, because [it was] the first organized group where I belonged. Corpo Diplomático. This was ‘79, roughly. This group would give origin to the famous Heróis Do Mar group. Heróis Do Mar was the same formation as Corpo Diplomático with another singer, because our singer was so irresponsible that we had to give him the sack. This was a bit like attitude at the moment. Nobody knew what the profession was. There was no profession, being a pop artist. We had to learn what being a pop artist was. What was the responsibilities, the schedules, being on time, rehearsing, all this. We started from scratch. Lauren Martin As you mentioned earlier, your schooling in music though was very, very different to this. Very different to punk, very different to new wave, and very different from discovering how to be a pop star. Tell us about you going to study music at conservatory here in Lisbon. What was the predominant school of thought about studying music at the time? Because it was a classical repertoire. Carlos Maria Trindade It was the harsh movement. It was the Russian discipline. My teacher, she thought discipline was more important than anything else – than sensibility, for instance. She would tap my fingers each time I would make some wrong movement or play the wrong note. It was very harsh. You had to study lots of hours. You wouldn’t get 20. You would get a 12, 13 note. It was very difficult to be good. I remember being in a room playing some jazz chords on the piano. And comes someone in the room and says, “This is not allowed, what you’re playing. This is not classical. This is diminished sevens and nines. You cannot play these chords on this piano.” I was astonished. Why was jazz anti-musical? I started asking questions. I was a kid. I said, “This is not right.” If jazz is not allowed, there’s something wrong. I left the classical world because I entered the new electrical group. I liked the organ. There were no synthesizers still, so I played the organ in this group. I started buying synthesizers. The Moog came out. The Clavinet came out. The Fender Rhodes came out. All the electrical gadgets start coming out and affecting the music in real time. This is why all the ’80s and even the ’70s, but above all the ’80s. You would listen the new rhythmic machine from Korg on a certain record. You’d go, “Wow, this is the new Korg rhythmic machine.” Music and technology, they were really attached. Lauren Martin The organ is an instrument that has followed you around for pretty much your whole career. What was the first time that you saw and heard an organ being played and thought, “Yeah, this is for me”? Carlos Maria Trindade The alternative was the piano, but the piano is a piece of furniture. You cannot carry it. In Portugal, there were no rooms with a piano. You had to move. If you were a keyboard player, you would have to go for an organ. There was no alternative. It was an organ. It was electric. It could play loud with the guitars, and even had the bass on the feet. It had two keyboards where you could have two different sounds, so it was paradise for me. It was, “Wow, what a power. I can pump up the volume.” This was all very new. Then came the synthesizers. To play with the guitars, you had to be loud, so the piano was no good. I had to go electrical, and so I did. Nowadays, I’m a little bit on the opposite side. I go back to the natural sounds. I play piano, acoustical piano. I play Fender Rhodes. I play Clavinet. I went back to all these vintage sounds. But this is the consequence of not nostalgia, but the necessity to go further on the technique, I think. Sometimes the keyboards are too easy sometimes. Lauren Martin Was your interest in the organ ever spurned from the more grand, like, spiritual church organ as well? Carlos Maria Trindade Yes. When I went to conservatoire, I didn’t want to learn piano. My aim was to enroll in the organ classes. But there was only one teacher, and there were no vacancies. So they said, “If you want to start this year, you either go to the piano, or you stay at home and come next year and enroll in the organ classes.” So I went to piano. But I wanted the organ. The organ always made me the creeps in the churches. So I wanted to be... There’s another thing I like about the organ, is that you turn your back on the audience. See what I mean? You’re not visible. Organ music comes from God, from the spheres. It’s meant to resonate on stones of the chapel or of the church and to impress the listeners. To impress the people that are assisting to the Mass. I like that role, which is not visible, but... You are free. You have no social contact with the audience. I like that. But then I got into a trap. I got into a pop group that became famous. So it’s the opposite. Lauren Martin It’s a very un-pop star thing to want to turn your back and be unknown. Carlos Maria Trindade It’s a punk thing as well. Lauren Martin It’s a punk thing. Carlos Maria Trindade I got into a trap. I wanted to play the organ, and I did. I played the organ, but it’s not the church organ. I wanted to not become famous, and I did. I didn’t want people to take my photos, and they did. I was on the front covers of the newspapers and everything, and plus we made the group that was highly polemic. It was accused of being a Nazi group. I’ll tell you why, because our first record had this cover. [shows album cover] This cover has the cross, right? This is the front of a boat, a fishing boat. We took this symbology, because we needed one, and people called it Nazi. This is not the only reason. Heróis Do Mar, as you know, it’s the first three words of our national anthem. The English tune starts with... ? Lauren Martin You’re putting me on the spot. I don’t know what the first words of “God Save The Queen” is. Carlos Maria Trindade You don’t know? Lauren Martin I don’t sing it very often, I’m afraid. Carlos Maria Trindade Anyway, Heróis Do Mar is the beginning of our... These two elements are very strong. That’s why we chose them. They are strong. Unfortunately, this was 1980, and we had the revolution in ‘74, which means people were still fed up with and afraid of a new dictatorship, right? People said, “No, these guys are fascists. We must stop this.” When this went into the shops, people didn’t put it on the, how do you say? On the montre. Lauren Martin On the counter? Carlos Maria Trindade Yeah, they wouldn’t show it. They were afraid. So the record didn’t sell much. We made a meeting and we said, “Are we going to finish? No, we cannot finish. We must carry on.” The label was very worried because they were getting pressures. Nobody wanted the record in the shops. It was not selling. When we would go to the radio to make an interview, everybody was menacing us with swastikas on the glasses of the radio station. We said the only thing to do is a dance hit. We made a dance hit. We made the first dance hit sang in Portuguese. It’s called “Amor,” which means love. We made this huge hit and released the maxi[-single], and it was... All the discotheques were passing this. All the radio stations. We sold I think 80 thousand maxi-singles in two weeks or something like that. And so we became professionals. That’s it. And the polemic went away because meanwhile, people... We were talking about the discoveries of the Portuguese overseas. All the adventure that was going on in a small, wooden how-do-you-say now? A ship. You’d cross the Atlantic and you would discover new worlds, so this was the story of our record. This is our cross of the Templars. It’s a religious order, but they are also fighters. We wanted to be strongly symbolic, but maybe we went a little bit too much on the symbology. If it was today, it would be okay. Nobody would care. In those times, the country was very political. All conversations were about politics because the country was choosing his way. Where do we go? It’s what everybody was discussing, which it’s good to discuss where you are going. This was what allowed us to become professional musicians. From here on, I started producing and helping other bands in the studio and started a professional life. That’s it. Lauren Martin When you talk about becoming a professional musician, studying at a conservatory for classical music, classical repertoire, having your fingers tapped for playing jazz, the cognitive dissonance between that and playing new wave music and releasing pop singles, what of your musical education did you take with you into studios? Or was it just a total breach? Carlos Maria Trindade No, it’s very useful. I’ll tell you, studying music doesn’t go away. It stays with you. Reading music, it’s extremely important when you work with other musicians, because you can take your own notes and you can be always on the right point in the arrangements, in the structure of the music. You can be very organized. As you know in popular music, not many people read. It’s not necessary. You write lyrics, you play a few chords, then you make a song. You don’t have to read music. Reading music for a producer is very, very important. For instance, comes a brass player and plays a wrong note. You know you play the wrong note because you have the score, right? If you didn’t have, you would have to listen to all the notes, it would be difficult. My education being classical was very important because it’s a weapon you have. Lauren Martin You might not have taken a church organ with you on tour. That wouldn’t quite have worked, so kind of set the scene for us. What were the contemporary music technologies that you were using at this time that you were able to develop this sound? Because new wave is very related to British and American pop music and it’s all over the continent, but I’m curious about if these machines are becoming much more accessible and everyone can kind of get them. What specifically was it about your sound that felt akin to Portuguese pop and new wave? What was special about it for you? What were these technologies that allowed you to do that? Carlos Maria Trindade The sound was not strictly Portuguese but the lyrics were. We were one of the first groups to write in Portuguese. Generation before ours, which is the ’70s generation, used to sing in English, funnily enough. They were good groups, very good groups we had. But they were singing in English. We asked ourselves, “Why in English? Why not in Portuguese?” Because Portuguese is a very difficult language to sing. It’s true. We have funny sounds in our language. When I’ve been touring abroad, people confound us with Russians. Once they came to us and asked, “Are you Russian musicians?” “No, we are Portuguese.” “Ah, Portuguese. Your sounds are similar to Russian.” Maybe, yeah. We have these kind of “r”s which are the same in Russian. These sounds make it difficult to write good lyrics. We got specialized. We started studying how to write in Portuguese and sing. This was the main difference, because the rest we were using mics like everybody else. We were using the Roland, Korg, the instruments that were the international makes. It was not through the sound but through the lyrics basically. Lauren Martin Can you tell us more then about how the language and the act of writing lyrics impacted on the actual sounds itself? Could we perhaps listen to a record from that time with some Portuguese lyrics and then you could tell us how the language would have impacted the music itself? Carlos Maria Trindade It impacts, some things are not possible. The rhymes are completely different. English language is open. It’s much easier to make a rhyme. When you sing, you go ah. Ah is good for the singer. If you have to go “u,” “e”... We have this “e,” which is very common in our language; it’s terrible for singers because it’s nasal. Nasal means part of the air goes through your mouth and part goes through your nose. We even have this “til.” You know this sign? You don’t have it in English. The Spanish use it on top of the “n.” We use it on top of the “a”s to make... For instance, a til on top of an “a” with an “o” goes “owe.” Which is nasal. Otherwise it would be “ow.” These little things make you think. Owe is very difficult, so I’ll change the word for another thing and I’ll change the rhyme. Plural in Portuguese is with an “s.” You must go, irmão is brother in Portuguese. There you go with the til. If you want the plural, several irmãos. We put an “s” on the end. This is terrible for singing. So you have to know these kinds of things. In English, “brother,” it’s easy to sing. Brother, brother! Irmão. It’s a big difference. Lauren Martin I get your point. Absolutely. Carlos Maria Trindade We had to study. Sometimes it’s very difficult. Sometimes you only realize when the singer comes and says, “This is impossible. What are you writing? I cannot sing this in this octave.” You go and change. Lauren Martin I’m interested then why continue to do it in Portuguese and not just go, “We’ll just sing ‘brother.’ We’ll just sing English.” Carlos Maria Trindade Because it was a path that hadn’t been done. It had been done in fado and in folk, but never in the electric music. We wanted to give it a try. Nowadays you have groups writing in Portuguese and in English. It’s not so important if you do it. We’ve done it because at the time, there was nobody singing in Portuguese. The records singing in Portuguese started to sell because of us and [foreign language], another singer. The labels wouldn’t believe that music sang in Portuguese would ever sell. They started to see sales, so they started to invest. That’s how we created the rock movement of the ’80s in Portugal that produced about, I don’t know, hundreds of groups. Hundreds. Every day you’d have a new group, it was amazing. Lauren Martin Shall we listen to something from that time so that everyone can get in the zone? Carlos Maria Trindade Yes we can. We can listen to, for instance... Lauren Martin Something of your own would be ideal. Carlos Maria Trindade For the lyrics, we can listen to this artist. He’s not among us anymore. It’s called António Variações. I produced his last record, along with Pedro Ayres, my partner. And we can listen to the first track, maybe. It’s kind of a singer that gave us a big... It was very pleasant to produce because his energy was amazing. (music: António Variações – unknown) Lauren Martin So tell us a little bit about that track that we just heard. What was your role in it? Because I can see, even though my Portuguese isn’t great, that you did play a hand in that record. So tell us a little bit about that and the sounds that we were working with at the time, because that feels extremely of its time as well. Carlos Maria Trindade Yeah. It is. This is an example of a singer that had no group, right? He had no musicians. So what the label did was contract a few musicians to make his records. He only released two records, then he died. He was the first case of AIDS in Portugal, very first case of AIDS. And he died just after making this record. He made two records. The label was very intelligent. It was EMI. They decided to give his first record to a Portugal group and the second record to a Lisbon group, right? Lisbon group was Heróis Do Mar. And the Portugal group was [says band’s name in Portuguese]. It’s also a very popular group that still exists. Still exists. So what they did is if this singer doesn’t have musicians but he wants to be a pop artist, we’re going to give the production to a group. Not a producer, but to a group. And it was a clever... it worked. It was a clever move, because they... Both records are different. And when you ask for a group to make a record you have the arrangements resolved, you have the production resolved, you know? Even the sound was a bit our sound, but with a different singer, right? So it was quite interesting. Lauren Martin What would you say your sound was at the time then? Carlos Maria Trindade Our sound was one thing live and another thing on record. Why? Because we didn’t have the know-how to make records. There was not, as we were the first ones to go into the studio with a different approach towards electrical music. There was no know-how. We didn’t have anybody to tell us, do this, do that. We were experimenting with the mixer, with the instruments. And so if you listen to some records today, you say, “Ah, this is not very good sound.” But the ideas are there. The studios were not investing in technology because it was very expensive. Outboards, good reverberations, good compressors. We had nothing of the kind. We had to improvise, you know? And so now there is two generations of recording musicians, and you have know-how. You have schools. So at the time we were experimenting, which is also good. It’s also good. Yeah. Lauren Martin That’s very good. Speaking of experimenting in that regard, we’re going to travel over quite a lot of genres and decades today. And this is coming at the tail end of... This is like the mid-’80s. Carlos Maria Trindade Yes. Lauren Martin Like ’84. What kind of access did you personally have to these technologies, if you’re saying that there wasn’t much of an industry to access? Where were you sourcing these machines from and who were you working with? Set the scene for us in that regard. Carlos Maria Trindade Our role was to make some pressure on the studios to buy material, right? So we were saying, if you want a greater sound, you must invest on a good equalizer, a good compressor, a good, you know, all these kind of things that the studio didn’t have. They had good mixing mixers, but they had nothing else. And so we were buying all these magazines to study the machinery, and we were telling the studios, buy this. You must buy this. You must buy that. And then they started, because with the success of the records, the money started pouring in, the editors started selling. The studios started having a job, you know? And they started to be well-equipped. At the same time, we were learning what the management does, learning what is merchandising, learning how to dress to go on stage, learning how to make a good lighting system. All this was... we were the first generation to deal with it, you know? Lauren Martin So you were essentially being rewarded through music sales... Carlos Maria Trindade We were pushing our way, you know. Pushing our way in saying you must invest, you must do this, you must do that. So that’s what we did. Lauren Martin What other kinds of music were you listening to at the time to get inspiration? If you’re saying that... although you were writing the lyrics in Portuguese, it was not super specifically a Portuguese style. Who else were you listening to at the time that was influential for you? Carlos Maria Trindade The music, after this French and Italian, chanson française. The Mediterranean sound came with the Beatles and that generation of groups. The English sound, right? The English and the American sound. They entered, accompanied by the hippie folklore. All this hippie folklore that we listen to, that we saw abroad, came here and you started to have all styles of music that you have today. You started to have rock, folk, electrical music, you know? All electric music. We were very influenced in fact by all kinds of sonorities. Meanwhile, groups like Pink Floyd were coming out. This was before, but the new wave groups were very strong, you know, because the sounds were very eclectic, very different. There was not a rule, right? This is not symphonic rock, it’s not reggae, it’s not... What is it? And that’s why I liked new wave. You didn’t know what it was. It was not a style, it was a kind of a movida, a kind of a way of life. Nightclubbing came. All this was interesting in the ’80s. Lauren Martin Let’s leave Portugal and go to London. You spent some time in London in the ’70s I believe. What were you doing in London and who did you meet? Carlos Maria Trindade Oh, I was not making music, I was surviving basically, yeah. Because I had fled the country. I didn’t go... We had the war in Africa. I didn’t want to go to a war, I didn’t want to kill people. So I said I must go away. And so I forged all the authorizations necessary, and I fled. I went to Paris, Amsterdam, hitchhiking, and then I couldn’t stay in Amsterdam and I went to London and got a job in a hotel washing dishes, doing whatever. And I was two years working here and there, knowing several parts of England, and then meanwhile there was a revolution in ’74 so I could come back, and that’s it. It was two years of exile. Lauren Martin Self-imposed exile, almost. Carlos Maria Trindade It was a self-imposed exile, but I was very interested because I could see concerts in London. So I could see, I don’t know, I even saw... I think I saw Pink Floyd in Hyde Park. I saw Soft Machine. I saw all these groups in pubs, you know. Pubs had a lot of music. I don’t know if they still have, but... Lauren Martin Yes they do. Carlos Maria Trindade They do, but I was amazed by the amount of music there was in a town like London. Because each pub had its group, plus you had the concerts in the parks. Free concerts in the parks. Plus you had the good venues to go and listen. And so I was happy to go to concerts and absorb, a thing that was impossible here. Lauren Martin There was a style that was really burgeoning at the time, particularly in the ’70s, with minimalism and experimental minimalism and ambient music. I know that you spent some time with David Toop. Is that correct? Carlos Maria Trindade Yeah. Lauren Martin Yeah. Can you tell us a little bit more about who he is and what you two would have discussed and learned together when it comes to music? Carlos Maria Trindade You’re asking me we discussed with? I discussed who, what with? With who? Lauren Martin With David Toop. Carlos Maria Trindade Ah, David Toop. No, I was invited. This was a few years later. I was invited to go to participate on a London festival of improvised music. And David Toop was the organizer that year. They had the London Musicians Collective organization, which was based on a unused train station, OK? It was interesting. And so I met all these avant-garde, improvised music milieu, which was a thing that I didn’t know even existed. With gigs, organized tours and things. And so I met all these musicians that were not pop musicians, jazz musicians. They were dissident from all these kinds of musics and they were trying to play together, improvising. So I found it very interesting because I had been reading John Cage, I had been listening to Brian Eno and his amazing theories about sound and music and I got very much interested in going on other areas, into other areas, that were not the pop-framed pop music, you know. Which is... Pop music is... It has a frame like this. [draws a small square in the air with his finger] You cannot go away from that. And it’s very social. You must interact. You must be visible, and all these movements are the opposite. The music is a bit for itself. The music is an abstract art that lives on itself. It doesn’t matter much the portrait of the musician who does it, you know? Lauren Martin Apart from the social and aesthetic aspects then of not being a pop star in that regard, what about the music and the sonics did you find particularly interesting? Because this is a style that you would go on to work with to quite some acclaim. Carlos Maria Trindade I think pop music produced very interesting personalities that were dissident from pop music. And Robert Fripp is an example. Brian Eno is another example. It’s examples of musicians that were involved into very popular and famous groups, made tours around the world. Fripp with King Crimson, Brian Eno with Roxy Music, but they said, “I’m not staying here, I’m going away.” Brian Eno for instance decided to go away, as he says when he was playing a gig, and instead of being concentrated on the concert, he was thinking that he had laundry to wash. See what I mean? He was not there anymore. So he said, “I’m doing nothing. I’m leaving,” right? And he started all these interesting ambient music thing. Through these people that went away from the pop music, I think it’s very interesting to find them doing a myriad of things that evolved the music business to other parameters and other experiences. Lauren Martin Well, your sound evolved kind of in the same way and I think maybe we should talk about a record that you made in 1991. Shall we listen to something from that? Carlos Maria Trindade Yes. This is an example of going away from pop, you know? Going away from pop and doing something else in a duo. It’s called “Blu Terra.” It’s from Mr. Wollogallu, a record made with Nuno Canavarro. Oops. Lauren Martin It’s fine. (music: Carlos Maria Trindade / Nuno Canavarro – “Blu Terra”) Lauren Martin What was that we were listening to? Tell us little bit about that. Carlos Maria Trindade “Blu Terra” is a track from Nuno’s side. We divided the record into two sides, right? My side and Nuno’s side. But we interacted in the arrangements, so it’s interesting methods. This is an example of coming away from the pop world and closing yourself in a room for six months and doing this, without listening to any music. Just two musicians, two computers, a mixer, a Dolby system, a few outboards, synthesizers and samplers and your imagination. And that’s it. Lauren Martin Because you were in Heróis do Mar for pretty much the whole ’80s. Carlos Maria Trindade Yes. Lauren Martin ’81 to ’89. And then this comes, you record this in ’89. Carlos Maria Trindade Yes. Lauren Martin And it comes out about... Carlos Maria Trindade ’90. Lauren Martin A year or two later. Carlos Maria Trindade Yeah. Lauren Martin The stylistic leap from Heróis do Mar to this record is quite astonishing. Can you tell us a little bit about how you met your collaborator, Nuno Canavarro, and what compelled you to start making this music? Carlos Maria Trindade Well, let’s say that this was already inside us. But we were busy doing pop. On the other side it was pop that allowed us to be professionals and living on music, through music, not having to do other jobs, right? So pop had this limitation but also this advantage, OK? This kind of music, at the time we wouldn’t live on this kind of music. The record was praised but passed unknown. There was not much public at the time in Portugal for this kind of music, and the label was an independent small label, didn’t have the power to export the records and promote it abroad. So it went into a... A few people always were listening to it and saying, “Ah, this record is intemporal. It seems like it was made yesterday. How could you do that?” And I was amazed when these Spanish editors from Barcelona contacted me through Facebook and say, “I was listening to this record you made and I think it’s magic. Do you want to release it?” And I said, “What? 27 years afterwards?” “Yeah, yeah, we think it’s magic. We want to release it. Can we get licenses and everything?” We started this process that took one year to try and free it from contracts from previous release, to make a contract, to make a new mastering, to make the original cover, everything. And they were very good, very competent, and they made a fantastic release and they put it alive again. It’s amazing. Lauren Martin Did you own your own master tapes of this record? Did you physically have them, or were they in the control of someone else? Carlos Maria Trindade No, there was nothing. Even the art cover was lost. Even this art cover was lost. This cover has a very funny story. It’s from the portfolio of an artist that is our friend, a painter. Can you open to take this little stripe out? And I went to his home and asked, “Can you show me your portfolio? Because I like your work and we are doing a record, and maybe you have some drawing or something that could be good?” And I find this. And then we didn’t have a title, so as I was reading some ethnomusicology book by Claude Lévi-Strauss and it had some names of African instruments, I went to the book and saw this wollogallu. Wollogallu is an African drum, earth drum. So it’s a hole you open on the ground and then you cover this hole with either thin wood or a skin, animal skin or even better a small tin thing or metal... Lauren Martin A sheet metal. Carlos Maria Trindade Yeah. And then you play drums on top of it and the earth resonates. The whole soil resonates. And I think I liked the idea of wollogallu and as we had this personagem, we made it Mr. Wollogallu. It was just like a joke, but it worked and... Lauren Martin So you’re a musician that resonates with the earth in this regard? Carlos Maria Trindade Yes. Yes. I read a lot about the origins of music because when you work, when you deal with your profession, you should know the history of the profession, and our profession is dealing with sound. So I’m always, even today, very much interested in the origins of sound and in sounds in general. That’s why I moved to the country, to... I moved to the country, people asked me, “Why did you move to the country?” Because I have silence. That’s it. So from silence, I can work my music. If I don’t have silence, like in the city you don’t have silence because you have a constant humming of about 10-15 dBs, right? Constant. And your limiar [threshold] goes from 15 to whatever. 100. But I have from 0 to 100. So I have dynamics because I have absolute silence. Sometimes, of course. Sometimes, you have planes passing by. Even at 10,000 meters, I can listen to planes in the country. But it’s interesting to know the history of sound, and this drum... ground drums were the first instruments of the world. Not with metal, but with skins and with other materials. But the original one, people who study think it was not the drums. It was the voice of the mother. So it was lullabies. The very first songs, the very first musical sounds that the humans invented, let’s say, were lullabies for the babies. Even... so the mother would entertain the children with lullabies. So you have the human voice, the female human voice, and the drums as the origin of instrumental music, right? Which is very interesting. That’s where wollogallu comes from, because wollogallu is an ethno thing and the record has a lot of ethno little micro-atmospheres. So it’s interesting. Lauren Martin Those atmospheres come from a discipline within music that is akin to Fourth World music, that’s the concept. I know you’re a fan of Jon Hassell. Carlos Maria Trindade Yes. Lauren Martin Kind of forefather of this style. What about Fourth World music do you find interesting and was applicable for this record? Carlos Maria Trindade Well in fact we were assembling from radio, from TV, from video. We were sampling from records, because samplers were machines that had just come out. We had... my sampler could sample 13 seconds, which was magic. But nowadays it’s ridiculous, because in computers you can sample 10 hours, if you want, of sound. So we had to make big gymnastics to put the samples. With the time we had, we had to be really economical to make the samplings. So we were... sampling was a recording process that gave a lot of power to the musician, because all of a sudden, you not only had the sounds inside the modules and the synthesizers, but you could put sounds from the outside into the synthesizers and mix it. And this record is a bit of those experimentations we made, you know? Lauren Martin What sources were you sampling from for tracks on this record in particular? Because there is quite a murky sense of cultural fusion that comes with Fourth World music that seems very much as a colonial kind of music tourism that doesn’t honor the sources of the sounds. Were you doing a lot of these field recordings yourself? Were you drawing from film and television? What kind of specific examples could you give us that are present in your work here? Carlos Maria Trindade The samples were a bit... this record had a very, how should I say, exigent selection. We made two records, and only one came out. We had, more, ten or twelve tracks that never came out. The rest, it got lost. It was on cassette tape and it got lost. The samples you listen here are a bit, how would I say? Random. It’s random, like, Nuno would have some ideas and would show me, and I’d say, “Wow, that’s fantastic.” But you’d have to agree that it was fantastic; otherwise, it wouldn’t be released. The same with me, and so we were very exigent on the selection we made. But we were really going mad, sampling everything because it was a novelty. It was very recent technology. Maybe if it was today; today I’m not sampling so much. I’m using more of the synthesized sounds. Everything’s been sampled; if you listen, we sampled in factories, industrial sounds, the urban sounds, everything. We sampled the voice and tune it up, we reverse it, we do whatever. Today you can do choirs of nonexistent persons. You can just compose for an orchestra without a violin. It’s not a novelty anymore. Lauren Martin Because it was a novelty then, though, I’m curious to keep it kind of contemporary. Maybe were there acoustic instruments that you were working with, that were able to tell a story that was specific to your experience? For example there are a lot of strings on this record and I’m curious to know if that came from the 12-stringed Portuguese guitar and the story-telling element of that. Is there a story behind the strings too? That is specifically Portuguese, perhaps? Carlos Maria Trindade Yes, because the concept of the record is instrumental, it’s not sang. You can listen to some voices, but they are sampled, right? We have never had a singer in the studio. Everything was done by us two. We didn’t have an external opinion. It was very difficult if you think that you are five months closed in a room, two heads, discussing. We discussed a lot and we were... talked a lot. Doing music is very tiring, so we would make breaks. Tea breaks. In the tea breaks we would talk about everything but music. Everything but music; traveling, Africa, I dunno. Any subject. These ideas we discussed would go into our work somehow. It was a lonesome project, so we have to find techniques of making a record without the voice, without the singer. Because in the pop music you have singer all the time, right? The music is made for a singer, and for the first time we were doing instrumental music. So we had to come up with all these tricks, little ambiances and strings. Because the string is the second most powerful thing after the voice. It’s the violin, the expressiveness, the ambient it suggests. So we had to invent interesting atmospheres beyond the human voice. Lauren Martin I’m surprised, actually, that you would say the string is the second most expressive, seeing as you’ve played organ and keys for your whole career. Carlos Maria Trindade The organ is not expressive. You don’t have dynamics. You either put it on or you put it off, right? The violin has vibrato, you can grow your sound, you can do very... interpretation, dramatic interpretation. What we were looking for was dramatism, which is difficult to do with synthesizers, dramatism and synthesizers are not done for dramatic expressiveness. They are done for electronic or for sequencing or, you know, it’s more on that way. We may the question of playing everything. This record is all played, it’s not sequenced. We made a couple of concerts and we played these pieces alive, and people were coming onstage to see if there was sequencing, backtrack, and they couldn’t find one. Lauren Martin Describe to us then, what it would’ve looked like to see this performed live, if there were no sequencers being used on stage. How did it look? How did it move? Carlos Maria Trindade It doesn’t move. It’s two people seated, one in front of the other, so it’s not very interesting. Lauren Martin Surrounded by what, though? Carlos Maria Trindade Surrounded by machines, and the only thing that is alive is the music. This is our idea, it’s the anti-pop, right? You have no painting on your face, you have no strong lights, spotlights. We didn’t even have lights. The light was still. It’s the anti-show, right? It’s the anti-show. It’s the music by itself, but it’s one of the most interesting concerts I ever made, if you ask me. Lauren Martin It sounds not too dissimilar to you trying to play keyboards in the north of Portugal with the press button. Carlos Maria Trindade Well, now that it’s different, we have good electricity. We have internet. You know, it’s so, so different, the world. We have maybe too much information nowadays. It’s the opposite, you know. We complained about not having information in the ’70s. Now, perhaps, we complain there is too much information and you must filter – which is the most difficult thing, filter your information. Lauren Martin Actually, speaking of filtering the information that might have gone into this record, when you said that you didn’t really talk about the process so much; you just went in and did it. What kind of spiritual or conceptual things were you thinking about? I know that your attachment to the organ did stem from the sense of spirituality and the devotional power of this instrument. Were you thinking about spirituality when you were making this record? Carlos Maria Trindade Well we had the reclusion like a monastery, right? You were not listening to any music. It was part of the contract not to be influenced, right? Because when you listen to much music, one thing is influence. The other thing is when you listen so much that it becomes part of your musical technique, right? And this is dangerous, because you show it immediately and people listen and say, “Ah, this is a bit like dah, dah, dah, dah.” “Ah, this is a bit like dah, dah, dah, dah.” And you’re done. If you are like dah, dah, dah, dah – dah, dah, dah, is better, right? Imitation is never better. So, we were thinking, “We must be original, and we don’t have a singer, and we only have this stuff.” We were really full of responsibility of this, because Nuno is a very serious person. When it comes to music, I’m also very serious so we were really serious about it like, “Whoa, how are we gonna do this and all this?” Through this responsibility, we made a good selection and only the best came out. We could’ve made a double record, or another records, but we would have chop, chop, chop, chop, chop it out. Chop it out, it’s not good enough, chop it out. This was better. But there is a monastery attitude towards... it’s hard, because during five months, you don’t go out, you don’t listen to other music. Because you don’t want to, because you’re already tired of working all day long. So we would talk, talk, talk. Not about music but about other things. Talk, talk. This talking and exchange of ideas worked. What I say to musicians is don’t just talk about music. Talk about other things, because you’re gonna learn something that will influence you on your next tune, on your next ambient, on your next one, your next music. But there is a religious attitude because I was a Catholic-brought child. Very strongly Catholic and I’m a dissident because of that. But the religious impact stood; it’s still here. So I need relgiosity, not necessarily Christian. I’m more inclined to Buddhism nowadays. I think it’s a clever religion, because it centers yourself into yourself. God is here, he’s not in the sky. See what I mean? He’s inside you, so I find it more interesting, you know? Lauren Martin And you feel that that tendency, or tendency towards an interest towards Buddhism, was fed into the process of making the record, then? Carlos Maria Trindade Yes. Buddhism talks a lot about, and Buddhist poetry talks about, a lot about nature and silence. So, nature is one thing I’m surrounded by now, which is good. Nature is, for me nowadays, almost as important as humankind. Which is a thing that a few years ago, I was completely urban and I wouldn’t think about it. I would say, “No, no, no, no. I need people around me.” What I could was, get silence and the importance of nature. So this goes along with Buddhism, more than with Catholicism, I think. Lauren Martin Because David Toop, actually, once said that silence is a kind of noise. It has its own information, and you just have to be perceptive enough to understand that information. It’s interesting that you’ve become more inclined to nature when you’re around silence. Carlos Maria Trindade Yes, silence is the support of music. It’s like the canvas is the support of the painter on canvas. So, you come from silence, which is zero music, and you start building from there. When you put a wrong sound on a track, you’ll never get the track back, because the wrong sound is there. Sometimes you have to destroy and go back and take away that sound and put another one, a good one, so that the things work. I always remember Brian Eno, he was mixing; he was composing on his studio, and there was some works on the next building. He was listening to a humming of a machine that was going mmmmmm, all the time. He never realized it, so he was composing around that sound; around it. When the work’s finished, he was listening to the tape. “This doesn’t work!” he said. “Ah I know why it didn’t work; the machine sound isn’t there anymore.” He had to recreate the kind of a drone, imitating the machine, so that the piece could work. This is amazing. This is a person who listens good, which is what we are specialized in. Musicians should be specialized in listening good. But it’s not always the case. Lauren Martin I find it interesting, then, that your musical journey would be to become a better musician, you have to become a better listener first. Carlos Maria Trindade Yes, I think so. Especially... well, maybe not in the pop music, because pop music is formatted. I found musicians that didn’t even listen to the whole group on stage, and I found it very strange. I said, “You don’t listen to the bass?” “Nah, nah, nah, it’s too loud, I don’t want to listen to the bass.” I said, “How do you play with them?” “Ah, we know, we know. It’s a routine.” See what I mean? Lauren Martin Do you feel, then, you’ve become – what’s the best way to say this – a bit more cynical about pop music, having done records like this? Carlos Maria Trindade Yes. Not only about pop music but society in general, because we are... I think we are moving away from things. The offer is so good, so big, so, you know, the more we have, the more we want. This is our nature. We all know about it. We all have a lot. Lots of informations, lots of new cars, lots of technology. We even are having lots of people controlling this technology, affecting the statistics with logarithms, trying to control yourselves, as you’ve seen recently. It’s dangerous times we’re living in, I think. They’re not naïve anymore. But I’m not, I don’t want to go back to naïveté. I don’t want to go back to dictatorship and the lack of information. What I think is we should educate our kids to filter. This is what they need, is a filter because can you imagine the information they’re gonna get in one generation time? It’s gonna be huge, because maybe it comes already from the moon or from Mars. When you start putting all these planets with people living in it and information coming from there, can you imagine what is going to happen? Lauren Martin If you make this on earth, I’d be very curious to hear what you might make on Mars. Carlos Maria Trindade Well, yeah, this record I think is good for an astronaut. Could be good for an astronaut to listen to. Lauren Martin Carlos, thank you very much. Carlos Maria Trindade It was a pleasure. Lauren Martin Thank you, yeah. [applause] Does anybody have any questions for Carlos? Anyone? Anything you’re curious about at all? Audience Member Thank you. I really liked your second album; you made me think a little bit about Japanese sounds from the ’70s, specially the more minimalistic movement. You were speaking as well about Buddhism, so I kind of connect the dots between the ohm and the minimalism. Did it have an influence on your work? Carlos Maria Trindade Did we have? Audience Member Did it have an influence in your work, Japanese music? Carlos Maria Trindade Well, not only Japanese music but Japanese society itself, because the first contact with Japanese society was, for me, was like, “What’s this? What’s this hierarchy? What’s this futuristic way of life?” The way they live, it’s suburban, it’s crazy. Then you start going into the minds of people and what you find, they are extremely polite. If you go and play in Japan, the public has a reverence towards the artists. At the end of the show they come and offer you things, like presents. They make a queue and they come with things – flowers, tea, painting. Even paintings they used to offer us. This reverence makes the relationship with silence that I was talking about in Buddhism, which is respect. Sound is a thing that, if I make noise, if I’m painting, nobody listens on the other room. If I’m making noise, everybody’s going to listen to this noise on a circle of, I dunno, how many meters? You must think that noise is like water. If it finds a little hole, it goes. I think this reverence makes you think that we are in a noisy society, and not only ideologically but because of this all, all this information and all this noise about truth. It’s more and more difficult to find the truth, right? Before, you had one father that told you the truth and you could not move from there, right? This is no good, either. But now it’s the opposite. You have many truths and you have to find a good one. The Japanese have a very hierarchical society, a very harsh one. It’s a laborers society, it’s made for work. They are in the firms about 13 hours a day, even if they are sleeping on a corner. But they must be there. If they are not there, they’re not well seen by the boss. It’s very harsh. But when they come out and go for a drink they are amazingly non-brutal. I never saw in Japan an aggression on the street, never. I never saw two Japanese fighting, how is it possible in towns like that with millions of people? That must be something they learned. It’s not American so it must’ve been, it’s not the Marshall Plan, it must’ve been Buddhism, the origins, maybe. I think about this. I will always be influenced by this Oriental pacifism that I don’t find in the West. I find, OK, we are in a very competitive society, but we cannot avoid fighting. We should be competitive without fighting, through your work, right? Not through... Again, or through, ahhh, you know. This is what I don’t like in our society. It’s too aggressive, physically aggressive. And the Japanese society is specific. They have other fights. They have very strong fights. For instance, the role of the woman is still a fight for the woman, because there is a lot of laws in Japan that consider the woman still serving the man. This is the other side of ancestry, of history. In general, I love Japanese frame of mind. I call it software. They have a different software. Audience Member Thank you. Lauren Martin Anyone else? Audience Member Hi, thank you for everything you said, it was precious. You were talking about the fact that musicians should specialize in listening good, but also the fact that our daily life is ruled by over-information. How do you think these two things relate? How can we perceive or filter everyday sounds with so much noise around us, and how can we educate towards this awareness of sound? Carlos Maria Trindade Well, I think it’s a very slow process. For instance, maybe a few people in this room have never thought about this. So, the fact that I’m saying this, maybe people start thinking, “Oh yeah, when I do a sound, other people listen. When I paint, people don’t listen, it’s different.” They don’t see... We have to have an altruistic attitude towards sound. Not me and my sound, but be sensitive to other people’s sounds. Even the urban sound can be interesting. Even a factory sound can be interesting. But it’s not next to my room, where I sleep, see what I mean? It’s on the place for being a factory. What we have to do is to open our ears the same way we open our eyes. We are in a visual society, basically, not in an aural society. So our ears, if you see a dog or a cat, it can move the ears, right? When he moves the ears, he listens on that direction, and each ear moves in a different direction. They are highly sophisticated in listening. We are very basic, because our ears that used to move before, don’t move anymore. Why? Because we don’t have necessity to move. But they used to move. We are not the best at listening. We listen to about 20,000 hertz at the maximum. Well, let’s say 17,000. And cats and dogs listen to 50,000 60,000 hertz, so they can listen to a noise that happens on the other side of the street and we can’t. We should be humble. We are not most sophisticated beings on earth. As far as it goes on listening, we are one of the worst. So we should be humble and educate our ears, more and more. Maybe we are not developing our ears as we are our eyes and our ability to manipulate technology. Lauren Martin Anyone else? We do have time if you’re curious, but, if not that’s also okay. No? Well, thank you. Oh wait, hang on! He wants another one. Hang on. You’re only allowed two maximum. Audience Member Sorry to be so annoying. You were talking about your album that was released on label from Barcelona. Lena D’Água’s Jardim Zoológico was made as a repress on a label from New Zealand as well. Do you think there is more recognition from our work, our more experimental work that was done in the ’70s and in the ’80s by other countries than inside our own country? Carlos Maria Trindade Maybe there is, it’s not my role to say. But what is amazing is that with this final nostalgia that is happening, that it’s the most interesting thing in the industry, in the music industry, happening. The CD format was a flop. It was very interesting for the labels to make money during the ’90s, but as a format it’s not interesting because it’s too small. You have no space for art cover, the lyrics cannot be read; you must go and fetch something to see the lyrics, and [picks up vinyl copy of Mr. Wollogallu] this is an object. This is an object. Apart from the music inside, you have a cover, well visible, you can read the things, and it’s proven that the industry committed a big mistake when they went to CD. The quality is not good and the format is a plastic, small, uninteresting format. That’s why it has killed, it has killed. This revival is a blast, because it permits records like this to come back, and many others. I bless this revival. I don’t know how it happened, nobody knows. It’s a question of going back to origins or going back to analog. Going back to distortion, because there’s a lot of distortion and CD doesn’t allow distortion. Distortion is [makes a breaking sound], it’s different, and here you can have a good head room and you can control distortion in the mastering process, which is very interesting. The distortion is there. You cannot really listen to it, but it’s there and the harmonics are there, so in the end you’ll listen to it. That’s why people like the vinyl, it’s an elastic environment. It’s not strict like the CD. I think it’s because of the vinyl revival that this came back to life. [holds up the Mr. Wollogallu record] It’s not only the music. Music rarely exists in itself. There is always some other thing attached to music. Either the face of the beautiful artist or the vinyl revival or a label that decided to invest in that artist and that’s how you know it. Brian Eno was interviewed for Red Bull. He was saying a very interesting thing, “I know lots of music that have as much quality as unknown music, unknown music that has as much quality as known music. And nobody knows it.” Why is this? This is terrible, to know that there is music, fantastic music, that never reached an audience. Why is that? Nobody picked up on it. There was no vinyl revival, no editor, it was unlucky. How many things, good, fantastic music you don’t know? Many, many, many music. Why is that? I think there’s always some piece of random process to make things happen. You don’t have a decision on your own life. I never decided to put this record out again. It was the editors, so it’s not because of me. I only made the music. It’s what I made. Maybe the work I’m doing today gets known and 20 years time it’s a good hope for me. It’s fantastic, it’s always good. Lauren Martin Carlos, thank you very much for your time today. Carlos Maria Trindade Thank you very much. Thank you. [applause]

---

Title: Christian Rich
Date: 2018-09-27
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/christian-rich/

Christian Rich
Taiwo and Kehinde Hassan, AKA Christian Rich, have created some of the most progressive rap productions of the ’10s. Moreover, the Chicago-born twins haven’t become an assembly-line for similar sounding beats. For a sampling of their dynamic range, listen to their work on two of Vince Staples’ biggest songs, “Senorita” and “Big Fish.” The former is a lugubrious dirge of cavernous low-end and plinking keys, while the latter is a quasi-club track characterized by a rubbery bassline and glinting melodic flourishes. After producing tracks for artists like Foxy Brown and Lil Kim in the early ’00s, Rich racked up enviable credits with marquee rappers like Earl Sweatshirt (“Chum”), Drake (“Pound Cake”), and J. Cole (“Sparks Will Fly”). Since moving to Berlin two years ago, Rich have continued that upward trajectory, producing songs for Jaden Smith (“GHOST”) and collaborating with Little Dragon and fellow Chicagoan Vic Mensa for “Dripping Summers,” which will appear on a forthcoming Christian Rich project.
In their lecture at RBMA Berlin 2018, Christian Rich discussed the stories behind their biggest hits, their approach to production and the importance of creating a feeling with your music.
Hosted by Torsten Schmidt Good morning everyone. We do have the great pleasure to welcome on this very couch two literal brothers. Please join me in welcoming Taiwo and Kehinde Hassan. Taiwo & Kehinde Hassan Thank you. Thank you for having us. Thank you, Torsten. Torsten Schmidt I grew up with twins. I’m godfather to twins. I have to ask the ultimate twin question. Who’s the older one? Kehinde Hassan He is, Taiwo. Taiwo Hassan Yes. There’s two answers to that. In regular life, I’m older because I came out five minutes before him. In Nigeria, he’s older because me coming out first means he told me to go look at the world and I said it was okay, because I started crying. That means I like it, and then he came out. Kehinde Hassan So, depends who you ask. Torsten Schmidt Which, I guess gets us right into one of my main topics here is home and origin mean very, very different things. We had a few people from Berlin already right now. You guys are living in Berlin here as well. Kehinde Hassan Yes. Almost two years now. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, two years. Almost. Torsten Schmidt And I guess it’s fair to say that you’re part of a new Berlin that’s not just gray and white and gray. Taiwo Hassan In the literal sense and other senses, yes. Berlin, for us, it was just a move to be somewhere that was just a little bit outside of the noise of Los Angeles and New York, where we still do most of our business, but Berlin is just quiet for us. Although it’s not quiet, it’s quiet for us. Torsten Schmidt Yeah, come on. Compared to LA where you have to be in bed at two latest so you don’t miss yoga class. Yeah, right. Taiwo Hassan But LA’s noisy in the sense of the business and what you have to take care of. Like, you have to really be super aware of what you’re doing all the time. If you care to be in that world, do you have an Audi or do you have a Lamborghini? These are really things that you have to think of as artists. People... Torsten Schmidt A Lambo is not a Lambo, there’s levels. Right? Taiwo Hassan [laughs] Right. It’s got to be a Murciélago, Gallardo, depends, what you have. Here, you can indulge in that world as well, but you can also just walk down the street. You can go to Berghain and chill, whatever you want. Which we like to indulge in, at times. Kehinde Hassan Right, very true. Torsten Schmidt You were born in Chicago, right? Taiwo Hassan Yep. Kehinde Hassan But we were raised in Nigeria. We moved to Lagos when we were four years old. I say Lagos is where we actually found the inspiration for music, really. But, Chicago, yeah. Torsten Schmidt I mean, there’s a fabric of music in both places. Kehinde Hassan Of course. Different rhythm, but same creativity, inspiration. Torsten Schmidt Speaking of Nigerian rhythms, because I guess to most Westerners, Nigeria’s all about Fela [Kuti], I guess. But, there’s a lot of other rhythms that are pretty big. Let’s have a little example here, and you can tell us what’s going on. (music: unknown) Kehinde Hassan When you hire a DJ for your Nigerian party, that’s what you play. You have to play that. You can play all the Drakes later, but you gotta play at least 30 records like that. Then, you know it’s a real Nigerian party, you get sprayed with money, but we grew up knowing that as Fuji a bit, but they speak Yoruba, but it’s a bit more... Taiwo Hassan To me, it’s like a Arabic dialect, Yoruba. Torsten Schmidt How important do you feel, because you’re producing a lot of vocalists – and we’ll get to that in a minute – how important do you feel, that folks do actually understand what someone is saying? Taiwo Hassan They don’t. Kehinde Hassan How important is it? OK. So, we had a conversation. He put me on to something a few days ago. Words are important, but feeling is way more important. He discovered with one of his friends that technically humans are not supposed to talk, really supposed to move our feelings. This is why you’d know how someone’s feeling. Even if they say something, you can see the feeling. So, words are important, but the reason we can all feel music, and connect, is because that’s how humans really talk. Words are important, but being human, we can always see through the noise, which is the wrong words, or the wrong message. You’ll still see the feeling of that person. That’s why you can like 2Pac, where he’s saying aggressive things, here he’s saying aggressive things, and all the rappers that are talking about killing people, whatever. You can see the pain. You can feel it. So, the words are important, but it’s the rhythm, and the feeling, and the melody that’s probably more important than anything. Taiwo Hassan When we write, we go with melody first. I read somewhere, a few years ago, Kurt Cobain did the same thing. He didn’t care about the words, he just liked the melodies first. And, if you listen to a lot of the songs he wrote, they penetrate more than just, at the time, grunge. He just kind of wrote in a very human, soulful way. It’s the same tempo as R&B or gospel, so, for us, the melody is first, and then you can go back and tweak the words for whatever you want it to mean. Torsten Schmidt At the same time, you got to produce people like King Push, without the ‘T,’ is probably one of the most audible guys and enunciated guys out there. No matter where, you can always hear every single syllable, if not letter. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, that’s what he’s about. Taiwo Hassan Like, Pusha T, I don’t know if you all remember, he used to be part of the Clipse. Him and his brother, they were like super lyricists, in the world where, back in 2003, it was really just about “Tip Drill,” all that stuff Nelly had, which was dope, but they were penetrating with some real stuff. And, he’s still doing the same thing now. It’s crazy. It’s a testament to, if you do have important words, how long it can live. Kehinde Hassan Outside of melodies. Taiwo & Kehinde Hassan His melodies are very ... he’s doing melodies, but it’s just not as pronounced as a R&B song, or a pop song, so the words are more important, in that scenario, I would say. Torsten Schmidt I guess before we get to Pusha, I would like to play a little something. (music: Junior M.A.F.I.A. – “Get Money”) Here’s to Christopher Wallace, and a guy called Lamont Porter. Taiwo Hassan Wow, but that’s Junior M.A.F.I.A. – “Get Money.” Kehinde Hassan So, I tell you two things about the serendipity and the album cover of Junior M.A.F.I.A., right? We’ll get to that real quick. So, the guy that created that record, the production, is a guy named EZ Elpee. He’s responsible for us being music producers. You wouldn’t know who we are if that guy didn’t grab us up. We were in college, junior year. We were those college kids that really – we knew we were going to be big, but we didn’t know what we were going to do. Torsten Schmidt Of course you did. Kehinde Hassan Of course. We’re Nigerians, you know. [laughs] Kehinde Hassan Somehow, some way, our beat... it wasn’t even our demo. Some guys we demoed, we made beats for their album, and he heard it. And he said, “The raps are wack, but those beats, who made those beats?” And, we’re like 18 years old. Taiwo Hassan He texted us on a two-way pager. You all remember what that is? A Motorola pager?
We used to have two-way pagers back then. We didn’t sell dope, it was just something you did. Kehinde Hassan It was just the cool thing to do. Torsten Schmidt Just a little bit of status. Kehinde Hassan Yeah. Exactly. Just a little bit of college status, whatever. So, he hit us up, and we didn’t believe it was him. Long story short, he wanted us to work with him and be part of his production company. And he said, “Send me some beats. Let’s figure something out.” And, the first beat we sent him is a Lil’ Kim – “Get in Touch with Us,” on her album La Bella Mafia. That’s our first platinum plaque, at 18 years old. Torsten Schmidt It’s funny you say that. Can we quickly watch video number 10 for about 50 seconds or so? Taiwo Hassan It’s amazing. We love old Bollywood, that’s great. Kehinde Hassan So, in Nigeria, we grew up watching Bollywood movies. All the family would sit around. There would be like 30 or 40 of us, in our uncles’ mansions, and we’d watch Bollywood movies for hours. We didn’t know what the hell they were saying, we just laughed and the music was so good. So, I was dating someone, at the time, in college. She was getting her eyebrows threaded, and she made me go with her. Like, “Just sit with me. I’m getting my eyebrows done.” I’m like, “Whatever, man.” So, I go there, and I hear this sample. I heard that, just a sample playing, and all the women there are Indian. I said, “What’s that record?” “Oh, I don’t know, some movie. You can go next door. They have all these movies, CDs you can buy, soundtracks.” I said, “What?” So, I went and found out. The movie’s called Kasoor. We didn’t have records placed back then, and I showed it to him, and he’s like, “Yeah, we should do something like that.” Chopped it up, looped it up, drummed on it, sent it out. [That became] Lil’ Kim’s record with Styles P. Torsten Schmidt Well, maybe one quick hint of it, because we’ve got tons of shit to go through. (music: Lil’ Kim feat. Styles P – “Get in Touch with Us”) It’s kind of fun how you went from Biggie to Junior M.A.F.I.A. to Lil’ Kim. It
was all one camp. Taiwo Hassan Yep, and we just became friends with Chi Modu, who’s the guy that did all the photos for 2Pac, Biggie, and he did the Junior M.A.F.I.A. album that that song is on. He just did an exhibition here, like two months ago, or something. Kehinde Hassan And he’s Nigerian. Taiwo Hassan And he’s Igbo, like Nigerian. We had a really good conversation yesterday about going back to Nigeria, and doing all this stuff, so that’s just dope. Deep. It’s a good surprise. This is nice. Torsten Schmidt I was wondering, you had this hook up, by this one guy, and I think it’s a classic transition that a lot of people have to go through in their career, that someone gives them a leg up, gives them a break, and then at one stage, you surpass them. And, that somehow does weird things with the relationship, at times. Taiwo Hassan We surpassed a lot of people. We’ve outlived a lot of people. But, we had a moment, after that. We moved to New York and we became bankers, doing investments with Chase Bank, so we had a short break. We learned business, stocks, and investments and stuff. Torsten Schmidt I mean, evolution is not linear, and you guys went to become investment bankers, and then you stopped at a time which suggests that Lehmans was a good thing for you? Taiwo Hassan Lehmans? You mean the Lehman Brothers? Kehinde Hassan I got fired. That’s why I stopped. He actually quit because of me. We were living in Atlanta. We had a house at 24 years old. I love saying that, because that was funny to have the house. We were part of the whole sub-prime thing. Right? Our interest rate was ridiculous. Torsten Schmidt So it was you guys. Kehinde Hassan Yes. We were part of it. We helped. Taiwo Hassan We weren’t the bankers. Kehinde Hassan We were the guys that had the house. So, I got fired from the job for not doing compliance things. I wasn’t paying attention. It was the best thing that happened. Because I got fired, he was like, “Alright, well, I shouldn’t work at the bank either. We should figure something out.” And, he made this song, called, “Famous Girl” and then we moved back to New York, and then the next chapter started. Torsten Schmidt Before we get there, seeing that you had your feet in both worlds, what is less realistic, Billionaires or Empire? Kehinde Hassan Less realistic? Taiwo Oh, the show. See, he doesn’t watch Billions. You mean the show Billions? He doesn’t watch that. Kehinde Hassan Empire’s not realistic. It doesn’t make sense. Taiwo Hassan Well, Billions is... We didn’t play on that level. We were doing the annuities, and home equity loans, and small investments. But, Billions seems pretty accurate. Empire is, to me, I love everyone on the show, because I know when they came up as actors, but it’s a non-African or African American’s version of what African-Americans go through in the music industry. And then, the guy that wrote the show, sat in the car one day and he said ... it was a guy, it was a producer. I forget his name. He came up with the show because he heard Jay-Z or something on the radio, and he thought about the beef between the east and west coast, back in the day, like Puffy and Suge Knight, and he decided to write that show. So, it’s coming off a really messed up premise. The show, for what it is, is dope for the actors, but for what it represents, for our culture, is not good, and it’s not accurate. We’re not going around shooting each other like that. It’s crazy. Torsten Schmidt Is Atlanta doing a better job? Taiwo Hassan Atlanta’s doing a way better job, for sure. Kehinde Hassan Atlanta’s probably about 70% accurate. Especially, living down there. I think the part about the kids running up on each other, and the violent parts are a bit exaggerated. But, it’s there. Taiwo Hassan I mean, Donald [Glover] is from Stone Mountain, and I used to work at a bank called SunTrust in Stone Mountain. So, Stone Mountain, Georgia is a rough place. Some nice parts, but it’s rough, so, yeah, it’s pretty accurate. But you shouldn’t watch television if you want to know what African Americans are going through. Kehinde Hassan Just hang with one. Taiwo Hassan Don’t hang with one. We’re not a museum. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, I’m just saying be friends with all cultures, Turkish people, Kurdish people, everyone. Taiwo Hassan If you want to learn about people, just study and read, and just don’t watch TV. TV’s entertainment. That’s what it’s for. It’s sensationalized, so, yeah. Torsten Schmidt Getting sensationalist stuff out of the way, can you tell us about that Nike story? Taiwo Hassan Oh, the shoes, that’s him. [points to Kehinde] Kehinde Hassan Growing up in Nigeria, two things we fantasized about: name brand shoes [and] keyboards. We spoke keyboards into existence. We used to lie to our friends, when we were nine years old in Nigeria, that my father has a keyboard for us in America. And, I remember it was Muyiwa and Segun. They lived next door. And they’re like, “Yeah, right. Your father doesn’t have that. You don’t have money,” or whatever. So, we get to America and, “Oh, shit, Pops really got keyboards for us, and we really got anything we want.” We’re like, “Oh, OK, this is great.” Also, we didn’t have name brand shoes. We had Payless. I don’t know if any of you know what that is, but Payless is like the lower version of sneakers, so... Taiwo Hassan It’s worse than Woolworths. Kehinde Hassan It’s worse than Woolworths. You buy sneakers for like 20 bucks. Whatever. We would paint Nike signs on them. Torsten Schmidt That’s what Virgil [Abloh] does. Kehinde Hassan You’re right. You’re right. It’s funny because we know all his cousins, because we’re from Chicago and we grew up with all his cousins. Anyway, different story. So, when we were nine, 10, we really even now, we know how to really draw well. That’s why we design. And, when I was nine, I really knew how to draw. I could look at anything, draw it, it looked like an adult drew it. So, my father used to get Time magazine, I can’t believe we even know this. My father used to get Time magazine, and on the back, there was Air Max. Obviously, I was fascinated with the Nike sign, like any design kid, so I traced the outline of the shoe. I remember, it was Andre Agassi’s shoe. It had like one strap that went across, and it had holes. And I said, “Man, that’s dope. I should just design that, make it a high top, put two straps across.” Apparently, I learned last year, that Nike never had a two strap technology. I created that, without even noticing it. That’s why Jordan had the two strap, the Air Raids. I was like, “Wow, that’s crazy.” So, anyway, I designed them, looked on the back of a Nike box – I don’t know where I got it from because we didn’t own Nikes – sent it to Portland, and they sent the letter back. Two different letters for two different shoes I drew. And he said, “Oh, thank you for your submission. These are nice, but keep submitting. We don’t need these,” and they sent the shoe back. At this point, we were in sixth grade. This girl named Kanisha was running around a few months later. She had these shoes on. I was like that looked like the shoe I drew. That’s kind of crazy. I said, “Where’d you get those shoes from?” She said, “Where? These are David Robinson shoes.” “Like, David Robinson? I made those.” Of course, she didn’t believe me. I had to bring the picture to show them. I’m like, “Look. This is my design.” My Pops didn’t take it seriously, so that’s that. Torsten Schmidt Have you been invited back to Beaverton in the mean time? Taiwo Hassan No, we can’t find that letter, that drawing. And even if you did they’d say, you know, statute of limitations. Kehinde Hassan I actually tried to have my lawyer go back, but the statue of limitation on anything like that, but... Torsten Schmidt Yeah, but I guess seeing where they are, especially this week. This is a perfect jump off for them to give you a consulting contract. Taiwo Hassan The [Colin] Kaepernick stuff? Kehinde Hassan They need it, yeah. Taiwo Hassan They’re vulnerable. Kehinde Hassan Vulnerable, yeah. Torsten Schmidt Not vulnerable, but it would totally fit the narrative. Let’s call someone after this. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, make some calls. Torsten Schmidt Speaking of calls. For the next one, because you briefly mentioned it. Do you want to hear the audio or want to show people the video? Taiwo The video. Because, it’s a lot... Torsten Schmidt OK. Number one, please. (video: Christian Rich – “Famous Girl”) Kehinde Hassan So, this is where the Christian Rich story becomes what it is. So, if you’re sleeping, wake up so you can know how to get rich, right? Seriously, that’s how we met Pharrell. If you don’t know that we know Pharrell, that’s how we met him. They heard that song, they thought we were two white guys, and they were looking for us. We’re in the video, but we have masks on. So, Pharrell and Shay from N.E.R.D. sourced us out, found us, changed our lives. But, before we get to that... Taiwo Hassan But the song... that song, I produced that and I’m singing on it and I’m rapping on it. This is when we lived in Atlanta, and I was a banker, and we couldn’t sell any beats. Kehinde Hassan Like a few years, like four years, maybe. Torsten Schmidt That’s like ten years ago, right? Taiwo Hassan This is 2006, 2007? So, this is when we went out on our own and we were working with EZ Elpee, so we couldn’t sell any beats. We lost the house because I had a breakdown, or as Kanye [West] would say, I had a breakthrough. So, I just didn’t want to work anymore. I just wanted to do music. So, we left the house and moved to an apartment in mid-town Atlanta, and he went on a date, or something, with some girl. And, I was just sitting in the house and I’m like, “OK. I need to figure something out. We’re not selling beats. I need to just write.” And I think I been working on my vocals for a while. The original song doesn’t have auto-tune – that version does. But I really taught myself how to sing, listening to any N.E.R.D. songs, Pharrell and all that stuff. Kehinde Hassan The-Dream. Taiwo Hassan The-Dream. And T-Pain. So, that song came about, and we kind of put a whole little mixtape together and sent it out around Chicago. And then we started to get a little buzz with our friends and other people, so then I decided we should move back to New York. We moved to New York, we met these guys that did the video BB Gun. They ended up doing a bunch of cool videos, Enrique Iglesias and some other people, but it all started from that video. Anyways, like he said, then we met Pharrell and those guys and then that chapter began, but we had a whole career as Christian Rich where I was just singing and rapping, and then when he felt like it, he would rap us some songs. Kehinde Hassan So, that song, as soon as we did that song, we got a residency at Webster Hall in New York. You guys remember Webster Hall? They had a studio. The Christian Rich story is so crazy. That’s the first time we started calling ourself Christian Rich. Torsten Schmidt Why? Would you pick the name again, now? Kehinde Hassan If we picked it now, we’d probably pick a Yoruba name. We’re very... we want things to be a bit more Nigerian these days. The name’s still great, but it was a styling company I was making, and I called it Christian Rich. And, us being bankers, he said, “I’m going to start a S corp,” if you know what a S corp is, and he named it Christian Rich. As we get into the Christian Rich world, we started meeting everyone fast. Like, we met Pharrell, started hanging out with them. That became, even now, a nine-year relationship, which is kind of weird at the same time. We met Diddy, like literally we recorded his album for like two weeks. We were working for him for two weeks in his studio. Long story, Lupe Fiasco. We worked with so many people. Taiwo Hassan We’re just in a very niche spot. The kind of music we make and the people we make it for, so it kind of put us in a nice avant-garde kind of space, which is cool. Torsten Schmidt But, if you approach it like an athlete, I mean, you’re getting blows at that stage, and how do you keep the strength to go, “OK. I had ten almosts and nothing good ever released.” Taiwo Hassan You got a bunch of stuff that’s working too. If you’re really out there working, you got stuff that’s working. At that time, we had... What did we have? I think we had a J. Cole record? J. Cole and Ludacris were fighting over our record. Kehinde Hassan That’s another story. Torsten Schmidt Two people that have some how played a role in your trajectory, were Pusha [T], who was mentioned before, who has a bit of a Def Jam love as well and John West. Taiwo Hassan John West. Wow, that story is crazy because we moved to LA. I finally quit being a banker. He already really got fired from the second banking job. I was working at Chase, and then I quit in 2009, went to Chicago for like a year and then moved to LA. Didn’t even understand what a publishing deal was so much. And then we run into this guy named John West who’s like a street performer. He just got to deal with Def Jam, and we went to go meet his manager... Kehinde Hassan Ben. Taiwo Hassan Ben, yeah, to go do a mixtape kind of thing for DC shoes. We had, like, some type of deal with them. And he gives me this song. Like, “Can you do something with this?” I said, “I think we can produce this song better.” Take it home, had a session, produced it, put strings and all that stuff on it. So Shay’s our manager we’re like, “Yo, can you get Pusha on here? I think Pusha would be good for this song. Tell him we’ll have them pay him 10K or something like that.” Pusha gives the verse the next day. And John West, his publisher at the time, is in the session. He’s kind of being a dickhead. He’s just kind of like, “Who are these guys?” Two weeks later the manager hooks us up, we end up becoming cool with his publisher. And then we sign with Warner Chapel. So us signing with Warner/Chappell is very important because that’s how we got to work with Earl Sweatshirt and EP his first album... Kehinde Hassan And Vince Staples. Taiwo Hassan And Vince Staples. Because this A&R linked us with his A&R. So the Pusha, John West thing is very important, because we just moved to LA, we had some money from some other things we had before, but we were new in town, and that literally set the trajectory to a whole different place, that song. Kehinde Hassan Changed the brand, definitely changed the brand. We got a little bit closer to how we wanted the brand to look. Torsten Schmidt And yeah, why don’t we take a quick look at video number three to see what that brand got to look and sound like. Kehinde Hassan Ah, there’s a video for this song. I meant, Earl Sweatshirt, I don’t mean this... [laughs] Taiwo Hassan Probably just didn’t make sense with the theme. It’s a bit happy, and you can tell the sound is dark. But that’s significant because most of that was produced by Chad Hugo of The Neptunes. So, when we worked on Earl Sweatshirt’s album, we were meant to just work on like two or three songs. And at the time, we were hanging out with The Neptunes a lot, so Chad was someone we would actually hang out with a lot, too. And then they asked us to do I think, like, three or four days in the studio with Earl. He just got back from Samoa, His mom put them in this school because he was hanging out with Tyler... Torsten Schmidt That’s Earl, not Chad. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, Earl, excuse me. Earl was coming back from Samoa, and was hanging out with Tyler and his mom didn’t like what they were doing a bunch. His mom is a scholar. People don’t know that. His mom is a law attorney at UCLA. So, he comes from like, a really good home. So anyways, he just got back, and he was really trying to understand what’s happening in music. They just got this crazy record deal at Sony. So, I just felt that it makes sense to have Chad Hugo of The Neptunes there, because that’s the sound and, you know, we don’t mind working with other producers, especially if there’s a friend. I’m going to make the story quick because it can be very long. The first session a bunch of different people in there. Early Vince Staples, who didn’t have a record deal. He was just Earl’s friend that was there to just help with some vocabulary and stuff or whatever. Corey Smyth who ends up becoming Vince Staples manager, and now is Dave Chappelle’s manager. And then Kenna and a bunch of relationships started from that session that we did. So we had Chad come down, and then Chad brings like 1,000 keyboards down because he’s just ready to get into the zone. And we’re working on the music, and this song came about because Earl came up with the bassline and the piano, and I started doing the drums and then we just started jamming out. And then his A&R came in like, “Yo, that’s the first single.” And I remember Chad started to play beats, and he played a beat that sounded like “Drop It Like It’s Hot.” And I was kind of like, “Eh, that’s not what we’re going for.” And then he pulled me to the side, like, “Ty, I don’t know what to give this kid. He’s too monotone, he’s too dark. “I was like it’s all good. Just follow our lead.” Chad is used to “Superthug...” Kehinde Hassan Pop artists. Taiwo Hassan Britney Spears, stuff like that. And he’s a real musician. He plays almost every instrument. He can learn an instrument, like, in a week. Chad is, like, next level genius. So, I think by the time we got to the end of this song, “Chum,” that same session he started to kind of get in the groove, and then we were just jamming out. I was just pressing some chords on Logic. And then Chad started playing a lead on, like, a Moog or something. Kehinde Hassan Trumpet, bass. Taiwo Hassan And then he went in there and played bass, and then he played the trumpet off key, and he just did all this stuff. And then I just kind of took it together and turned it into the outro. Kehinde Hassan And then we got for Pharrell and Chad together for the first time as producers, and they did a song on that album called “Burgundy.” Because of that. Taiwo Hassan Yeah. So that’s that song itself is very vital to who we are now. Torsten Schmidt How did you manage that sonically? Because, I mean, a big part of that song outside of Earl’s performance is that “Humpty Dump” drum break. Kehinde Hassan Oh, don’t say that. We played that live in the studio. Torsten Schmidt [laughs] And then it goes into this other drum. Kehinde Hassan The second half... The part with Chad, that was Earl playing around. We hated those drums because they’re like Logic stock drums and we’re like, “Ah, let’s change that. Taiwo Hassan You knew that? When you heard that, you knew those drums? Torsten Schmidt There’s only that many breaks, man. Kehinde Hassan True. But yeah, Earl, he just played around and we wanted to replace the drums. And he was just like, “Nah. Let me leave it.” But actually, we tried to put Thom Yorke on this song. And he was like, “Nah, it’s too pop, I want to go dark.” So, it worked either way but, yeah, we were just jamming. Torsten Schmidt I’m not gonna say what I’m thinking. Kehinde Hassan No, I’m messing with you, go ahead, say whatever you want. There’s no sample snitching. Torsten Schmidt We’re just sticking on the Earl thing because, not only was it a pretty important, changing moment, and not only is he a great radio host, as some of you might have heard out there, but I guess there’s a lot of changes that are going on at the same time, and maybe let’s listen to a little bit of this. (music: Earl Sweatshirt – “Chum” / applause) Taiwo Hassan So, that’s another crazy story. That was the sessions for the Doris album. Kehinde Hassan With RZA. Taiwo Hassan With RZA. And his A&R JR Lindsey asked us to... He was in New York, so he asked us to sit in on this session. So, Earl didn’t really understand. He understood, but he really didn’t know who RZA was. He had to ask his mom, “What’s the big deal about it?” He knew who he was, but why is he a big deal. Because I don’t think he wanted to show up. But anyways, he showed up. It’s RZA, and his crew. They’ve got like a hella chicken wings, and like Patron and all this stuff. And we’re just talking for like, six hours. No, like, four hours. And Vince Staples is in there. He’s telling the craziest stories about his hood, where he’s from, that’s something he would always do. So, then we played them the album, what we did so far, and then RZA’s just kind of like, “Yeah, OK, you don’t need me for the album, like, and, you know, I charge too much.” I think he charged quarter of a million. And we’re like, all right, whatever. So, he leaves the room, and he leaves this beat machine. It’s like an MPC, but it’s a Roland. And I’m like, “Oh, fuck this, we’re going to get a beat out of this dude.” So, I just go through all his sample pads. And this guy has a video of this – Sony sent some documentary dude to tape all this. So, I’m just going through all the banks. And then I finally find this loop. And then Earl is like, “Yo, let’s use that one.” So, the way to beat the way the sample stops, it stops. We didn’t make it like that’s just the way it stops. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, there was no more of it. Taiwo Hassan Then RZA walks in a room, and he seeing me touching his Roland, and he’s just looking at me. “What the hell are you doing?” But then he hears what we’re coming up with like, “Actually, that’s kind of dope.” I asked RZA to give us a five minute freestyle, because I wanted him to do... Kehinde Hassan With the park mic. Taiwo Hassan With the... Kehinde Hassan You know, what’s that 150 or whatever. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, the Shure. It’s a little outside mic. Kehinde Hassan Basic mic. Taiwo Hassan A preacher mic. And for some reason he just got really amped, and then he just went in the studio and started rapping. It would sound like nonsense... This is funny, RZA was just talking that Bobby Digital shit. What’s that line? He has this line that he says that’s really funny. It ended up on another song that we did with those vocals. But it’s, “Boom, boom, boom, something.” Anyway, so then we took that and Earl was like, “Okay, let’s make that the hook.” And then we chopped it up a certain way. So that’s why... Kehinde Hassan That’s why he’s on the record. Taiwo Hassan That’s why he’s on the song. He didn’t want to be... He liked hanging out with us, but he didn’t want to do a song. So, I don’t think he charged a quarter of a million because, he said if he actually has to touch it and do the beat, then it’s like a quarter of a million. So, technically we did the beat and just took the sample. So, it worked out. We didn’t charge a quarter of a million. But that’s a funny story. Torsten Schmidt As far as the content of what he’s saying, how much how do you deal with providing a carpet and then people... Taiwo Hassan For the type of lyrics they say? Torsten Schmidt It’s like I mean, I guess everyone heard what he was saying, but you strike me more like the, “I want to count your freckles in the morning,” kind of guys rather than what he’s saying. Taiwo Hassan Who, us? Torsten Schmidt Yeah. Taiwo Hassan OK, so we have a lot of sides to us. Kehinde Hassan So, we’re kind of those kind of dudes. I mean, we really, we’re from the hood, we’re from Chicago, and we’re from the hood in Nigeria so we just... We kind of know how to navigate in the world, in the business world, so you can’t show “the fuck your freckles off your face” guy, you can’t show that navigating the world, really. Not that you can’t show it, it just makes the world harder. I would never – real quick – I would never tell a woman that, “I’ll fuck the freckles off your face.” Kehinde Hassan Girl, I would say girl, or lady, or young lady. Taiwo Hassan I’m not trying to fuck the freckles off no one’s face. I’m just trying to have a good time. [laughter] Kehinde Hassan You know, if you look at the artists we work with, we don’t really... We will work with everybody, but you know when it comes to like trap music, I would love to work with Migos, and Future, and what’s the new kid? [unintelligible] I think. But if you pay attention to the kind of hip-hop we do, it’s kind of like intellectual rap, but not purposely. Taiwo Hassan I think the genius in Earl’s [music] is being able to take any subject and just turn it into this soliloquy of different angles of the same kind of subject. So, RZA’s talking about fucking a woman or whatever, but then Earl’s talking about how he’s fucking over the label, he gets to do whatever he wants, but he’s talking about a girl. So, his genius really comes in being able to see the 360 of one scenario, and you can see that through his whole career. Kehinde Hassan I think Earl Sweatshirt sees lyrics. If language is linear, he sees it kind of like that movie Arrival, he sees it like it’s all happening at the same time, so you can see all the different parts. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, the beginning and end. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, exactly. He knows the end result because he knows the middle, because he knows the beginning. So, he can attack it that way. Torsten Schmidt Five points for metaphor there. Kehinde Hassan There you go. Torsten Schmidt Yeah that’s probably go back to safer, nerdy territory. Taiwo Hassan Keep it dirty, keep it real. Torsten Schmidt Why don’t we bring some Cologne and some [David] Axelrod in here? Same album. (music: Earl Sweatshirt feat. Vince Staples – “Centurion” / applause) Kehinde Hassan Tell the original version of that song. Taiwo Hassan Which one? Kehinde Hassan Buddy and Snoop [Dogg]. Taiwo Hassan Oh, that’s one of those songs that somebody else picked first. Pharrell’s artist, Buddy, he’s a great artist now. But he picked that beat first. I don’t know what they did with it. It was him and Snoop. And that song was actually good. But I played like an early example of this beat to Earl, and he was just like, “That’s mine, I’m using it,” so that was that. But that’s David Axelrod, “A Divine Image.” We’ve had that sample since 2006, 2007, just trying to find what to do with it, so that landed... Kehinde Hassan And David Axelrod is actually the A&R – he’s a jazz artist experimental artist, but he’s the A&R... Or was, he passed, God bless him. We wanted to work with him. He actually was fair with the sample clearance a bit, but he’s the A&R at Atlantic who actually put Lou Rawls on. Taiwo Hassan Columbia. Kehinde Hassan No, it was Atlantic. Taiwo Hassan Columbia. Kehine Hassan Columbia, whatever. One of those labels. So, his history goes deep to music but then the business side. Kehinde Hassan Can you find the intro and play the intro of that song? Not, like, the very beginning intro of... Torsten Schmidt You mean Axelrod? Kehinde Hassan No, no, ours, “Centurion.” Not where Vince is rapping, but like it’s a little bit after he does it, after all that. (music: “Centurion” intro) Taiwo Hassan You guys hear that vocal, that screaming? That’s the group Can, and that’s from a 14-minute song which I didn’t mean to leave on there. It was just for effect. And his A&R made me leave it on there, and they took half the publishing of the song. For that part. Torsten Schmidt You talk about Nigeria, you don’t with fuck Cologne. Kehinde Hassan Oh, are they from Cologne? That was worth it. Taiwo Hassan I don’t know if it was worth it, man. Kehinde Hassan It was worth it. Taiwo Hassan I like Can, they’re dope. But man, that was kind of shady. Anyway, that’s how you all get down in Cologne. OK. Mental note. Torsten Schmidt Speaking of people you don’t talk to anymore, because I was curious when I was going through these things and you mentioned it earlier, but somehow I figured that was more the reason, because – Kehinde Hassan We still talk. Torsten Schmidt Because that’s clearly a Pharrell starting... Taiwo Hassan No, no, he loved us, because I sounded like him vocally, and our aesthetics... No, no, no, Donald asked me for Neptune beat. And then I just did a Neptune beat for him. If you ask me for a Neptune beat, I know how to do a Neptune beat. Torsten Schmidt Oh, you can count to four. Taiwo Hassan Right. Now, do you notice anything else in that beat? Torsten Schmidt I think I wanted to talk about the same artist, but maybe a different beat. (music: Childish Gambino feat. Christian Rich – “The Palisades” / applause) Lando Calrissian. Taiwo Hassan Star Wars? I forgot the name of that. I know him as Donald, but Lando works, too. He’s going to have his own movie, I heard, his own Lando movie. That’s a crazy song. Torsten Schmidt That’s when Lando was still doing music. Kehinde Hassan Finding Childish Gambino was all his idea. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, see, we were working on Earl’s album, and a mutual friend told me that Donald is a big fan of Earl Sweatshirt, so we were doing a whole Soho House thing in West Hollywood, hanging out, and I saw him, or maybe the friend introduced us, I don’t know. And I knew what to say to him to just try to work on his music. I knew he was working on some new music. I wasn’t really into what he did before. But we’re the type that if we don’t like what you did before, we’re gonna help you make it better. We’re not gossip and talk shit about you. We’re just gonna help you make it better in our own way. So, I told him, “Hey, we’re working on Earl Sweatshirt’s album. Come by the house and just come listen to it.” And I didn’t think he was gonna do it. He texts me like, a week later, brings his whole crew to come listen to it in my car. And I’m playing it for them, they’re just like, “OK.” And then a week later they were renting out... Chris Bosh, who’s an NBA player, was renting out some house in Pacific Palisades, his house was on a hill, it’s crazy. And he invites us over, we’re playing a bunch of beats, and then that beat stuck out. The original version didn’t have that 808. Because he actually went in and co-produced it with us, added the 808 and the choir. But the beat was there, and the hook was there. This girl named Kai, who ended up doing some dope records with Diplo, and Flume and some other people. The story of how I got her vocals is so crazy. Torsten Schmidt Alright. Speaking of which, number eight please, on the videos. (video: Vince Staples – “Señorita” / applause) Kehinde Hassan Ah, shit. Wow. That was 2014. Every record we have has a crazy story. 2014, downtown Los Angeles. This one we were still roommates, in my kitchen, our kitchen. Laptop out, listening to Travis Scott, I said, “This kid has a great energy.” That’s why I was saying humans move by feelings. I heard the feeling of his music and I said, “I want to make a trap record,” and I made that. The original version had piano chords on there. And any time we do beats I’ll start a beat, and I’ll send it to him, so I told him, “Listen to this beat.” And he heard all the chords, and he was like, “Take the chords out, just put the... Leave the pianos staccato.” I was like, “Ah, that sounds great.” We sent that to Pusha T, long story, Pusha T was like, “I don’t want to do trap records.” Before we even got a note from him I already sent it to Vince Staples. His manager hit me back like, 50 seconds later, “Yo, got it, we’re using it. Single. Thank you.” Great. But that sample, that voice is Future, it was a reference. I just wanted to say, “Let’s do an aggressive, Atlanta kind of record.” But I guess they heard it and said, “Nah, let’s leave him on there.” So, Future’s manager and Corey, who was Vince’s manager... Future didn’t know who Vince was, he was like, “Who is this? Why would I clear this?” And he explained to him who he was, and the trajectory of just the way the brand is, and they cleared it, and [that was] Vince Staples’ arrival, really. And they were really playing that record without telling us they were about to put it out low key. It was hilarious. The first time we saw it it was South by Southwest. I just see all these kids going crazy online. I’m like, “What song are they talking about?” And I play the video, and it’s this song. But that was the beginning of... Not really the beginning, but for Vince that was the beginning of us doing records that were monumental for him. Torsten Schmidt The one we played before that was the first one you worked with Vince, right? “Centurion?” Kehind Hassan Yeah, “Centurion.” And then we had our song on our album called FW14 called “High.” That was really the first song that we did. And then “Señorita.” Torsten Schmidt Just for context, FW14 would be... Taiwo Hassan That’s our first solo LP that we put out with an indie label. That came out 2015. And we had some jams on that. Pretty great records. Torsten Schmidt So, if you have time later, because... I mean, we have a bunch of shit to go through. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, check it out. SS14, FW14. Great albums. Torsten Schmidt Is that, like, what fashion for winter, or what is it? Taiwo Hassan Yeah, people always make fun of us and say Christian Rich sounds like a clothing brand. So, we wanted to play on it. Kehinde Hassan We were like, okay, let’s make seasons, albums, you know. We should have made merch. We didn’t make merch. But it would have made sense. (music: Vince Staples – “Big Fish” / applause) Torsten Schmidt There’s a bunch of things in there. One of the curious things is probably before we get to the actual story that evolved around that and the sharks and that, but you are actually sampling and old Vince Staples track in there sort of, right? Kehinde Hassan No. You mean like... Torsten Schmidt The “Norf Norf” bit? Kehinde Hassan Nah that’s just him saying it. Yeah, there’s no samples in there. Torsten Schmidt And so he’s just repeating an old line? Taiwo Hassan Yeah, he was repeating an old line, which technically counts as a sample, but nah, no samples. Torsten Schmidt Alright. So what’s the story with the video and all that that happened? Kehinde Hassan Well, I actually don’t know the story of the
video. Torsten Schmidt No, the radio thing, why it became so big a year afterwards? Kehinde Hassan Is that what happened? Torsten Schmidt I guess so. Kehinde Hassan We were here so, oh damn OK. I can only guess maybe Def Jam was like, “OK, this is working.” But OK, the day before we moved... My brother was here in Berlin a week or two before me, so the day before we moved to Berlin I made that song, and I was in the studio with Vince. We had another track on the Big Fish album. And I remember he had a board – I’m gonna tell you guys a really funny story, he had a board that said “Big Fish Theory” and it was all the tracks. And there’s this set producer in the room that you guys all know and they’re arguing. And they’re arguing about tracks. And I’m just like, “Why am I here?” He’s like, “Yo, just let me play you the album.” Listened to the album, I heard our other track, and I said, “This is nice but you need that big song. You need something that’s gonna make people say, “Yo Vince you know?” I didn’t have the track, but I said, “Listen, I’m gonna make you a song that’s gonna have a big feature on there, and it’s gonna be a single.” Whatever, cool. I go home, I already had all my stuff packed ready for Berlin, so I had my desktop out and made the beat real quick. I already had the Juicy J hook from something else, so we put that hook on there. I sent it to him [points to Taiwo] and I said, “Yo, can you fix this up before I send it out?” So he did his thing to it, sent it out. Vince and his manager were calling me at the same time again within 30 seconds. And boom, single. But when we made that record with Vince I was telling Vince – I don’t want to get into this – but I was telling Vince about manifestation. And I was telling him let’s manifest something. I thought of what it was and he was like, “OK, OK, yo let’s manifest a hit.” And we made that record whatever it is. So, I can only guess that it got bigger outside of just the album because that’s normally how record labels work. If a record is doing well and they see more traction than expected then they go pay for radio. So, that’s probably what happened. Torsten Schmidt But what was that story about the woman in LA calling the radio station about being offended by the lyrics and stuff? Kehinde Hassan Oh, that was “Norf Norf.” Torsten Schmidt Yeah, which is the line that Vince repeated. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, that’s probably what he was referencing. Taiwo Hassan There was a lady there. Kehinde Hassan Christian lady. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, she heard “Norf Norf” on the radio, and she was offended because of the lyrics. These were vulgar lyrics at the time. Actually, Vince doesn’t curse anymore because of that woman. So yeah, he doesn’t curse on Big Fish, there’s no clean version. So, she actually made an effect. I think because that video went viral of this Christian woman going crazy over “Norf Norf” it projected it kind of boosted everything else for him so maybe that’s what you’re referring to. Torsten Schmidt Yeah, I mean I was just thinking because of the line that he repeats from that song. But it’s curious that you’re saying that he doesn’t cuss anymore. Taiwo Hassan No. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, at least on that song. Taiwo Hassan I haven’t heard him curse in any song. We have another song. OK, he curses on that. He didn’t curse on that song. Nevermind. Torsten Schmidt Probably a little later we could talk about more details as you brought the session files. Taiwo Hassan Yes, for Big Fish. Torsten Schmidt I know we’re doing a little bit bad for time so make a pick. Do you want to talk Drake, Jay-Z, Wale or Jaden Smith? Taiwo Hassan What was the first name? Kehinde Hassan Drake and Jay-Z – “Pound Cake.” Wale. Taiwo Hassan Forget about that. Kehinde Hassan You think Jaden? Taiwo Hassan Yeah, that’s boring. Let’s talk about Jaden. Kehinde Hassan Let’s talk about Jaden because that’s an interesting story. Torsten Schmidt Alright. I guess we got a video for that one too right? (video: Jaden Smith feat. Christian Rich – “Ghost” / applause) So you’re playing Monopoly a lot? Taiwo Hassan He is. Kehinde Hassan I just love Monopoly. I used to. Taiwo Hassan That song has a very funny origin. You can tell him. Kehinde Hassan OK. So, “Ghost” we produced that with FNZ, who do a lot of stuff with A$AP Rocky and HWLS. That was a Red Bull session we made that beat in LA. Ironically. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, Red Bull Studios. Kehinde Hassan We just signed our publishing deals, and we hit up Red Bull and said we need to record and just produce with other producers. And we did three tracks or four, and that was the one that stuck out to me. So, the way we do sessions we’ll just, we’re producing with other people or artists... We learned that from Pharrell. You create songs. If I’m in with Ariana Grande, we make five songs, maybe she’ll use two, then we have three. But we don’t let them go to waste. So, when we had this song this track itself it was either going to be pitched to French Montana, A$AP Rocky, who we actually did pitch it to, or we’re gonna keep it as artists. Torsten Schmidt Folks might get a little confused because you talk a lot about the brand and the product and that mercantile aspect of it. And think like, “Oh hang on, do these guys think in spreadsheets?” But I think there’s aspects where it’s pretty clear that you’re not because there’s also outside of the designing, which is a totally different ball game, another side to you which is I guess the film things that you’re trying to get into. And there you’re making sure people don’t forget about the people, the giants whose shoulders we stand on, and I hear there’s a project about Benjamin Wright Jr. somewhere in the works. Taiwo Hassan Oh, it was in works. Yeah, before we left LA I got introduced to Benjamin Wright. He’s a string conductor. He did Michael Jackson’s “Rock with You” and “Don’t Stop“ and he did all of Justin Timberlake’s stuff, except “Cry Me A River.” He did everything else. And the funny thing is his name’s Benjamin Wright, and he lives in the Valley in LA and we went to his house and then this Chinese African American woman comes to the door. We’re like, “Oh we’re at the wrong house. We’re looking for a white dude named Benjamin Wright.” She’s like, “This is the house.” Because he’s black he’s African American, he’s from Mississippi. He was able to dodge the Vietnam War, in an unfortunate way. But his story is just crazy. No one knows who he is. He’s signed to Quincy Jones [Music] Publishing, and we just thought we should do a documentary on him. So we started to put that together. We were working with – what’s that production company called? Yours Truly yeah. A really cool production company out of LA. When I moved I kind of started, moved to Berlin, kind of started doing other stuff. I left other people to do that, and they ended up not doing it. They ended up not getting along. Kehinde Hassan So, maybe we could revisit it. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, but we’re working on an anime now. Kehinde Hassan We’re actually doing an anime cartoon series. Taiwo Hassan That’s something we’re doing for ourselves. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, 30 minute episode. Taiwo Hassan And we’re scoring the whole thing. Everything goes back to us just doing the whole music. We just want to score it ourselves. Torsten Schmidt When is that going to see the light of day? Taiwo Hassan Hopefully 2020. Kehinde Hassan But there will be a trailer of sorts that kinda will be floating around end of this year maybe. Torsten Schmidt You just mentioned another person that you seem to be a fair, be doing a fair bit of work with and also kind of a loop back to Chicago as well. And that’s probably a nice way to end before we go to questions and maybe those session files. Vic Mensa? Kehinde Hassan Man, Vic. So this generation of artists now I can name 10 artists that were influenced by us without us even realizing it. Some of them know us personally, Chance the Rapper’s whole, his visuals the album cover all came from a kid that – OK, can I tell that story real quick? Then you’ll understand Vic while I’m saying this. So, GoldLink, SZA, Chance the Rapper, Vic Mensa, Vince Staples all these people kind of link back to us inspiration wise. So, Vic Mensa introduced Chance to our music. Vic has always been a fan, but we never met him. Taiwo Hassan With his old group, Kids These Days. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, Kids These Days. So, he’s always rooting for us when we were back in New York. So we had an album cover called The Decadence and the kid that drew it I worked with him when we were 18 when we did The Decadence, which was probably 15 years later. That album cover is what Chance saw and said, “Yo I want the guy that drew that to do my artwork.” Which is now all his merch, the Acid Rap cover, all of that. So, Vic is responsible for kind of getting the kids, the youth in Chicago, to understand who we were musically. So, whenever we would meet Vic, it was always love. We worked on his first mixtape, the Innanetape I think it was called, before he had his big break. And he’s always been the little homie that’s always active with Chicago artists. And we have a new song called “Dripping Summers” with Little Dragon that he wanted to be on so he’s on that. So, now we’re kinda doing a bit more work together, but he’s a dear friend and just fellow a African. He’s half Ghanaian, so it’s always good to work with Vic. Torsten Schmidt Yeah, there seems to be a bigger breed of artists in Chicago now then let’s say that have a national and global role in the hip-hop world way more than before G.O.O.D. Music existed, right? Taiwo Hassan Of course. Even before G.O.O.D. music, Lupe Fiasco was big in the city. Before him was Twista, Crucial Conflict, Do or Die. Kehinde Hassan Psychodrama. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, but I think Lupe probably made the biggest impact because his music sounded more like what they were doing in the east coast. Definitely before G.O.O.D. Music. G.O.O.D. Music is kind of like they kind of made the city make sense musically. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, it was a bit more organized. You can see label artists, artist produced, it was structured. Before it was really the west side now that I think about it. Twista, Do or Die, Crucial Conflict all those guys are from the west side. That’s why the sound was like that. Taiwo Hassan Lupe’s from the west side too. Kehinde Hassan Lupe, yeah. Torsten Schmidt Shall we have a really quick listen to... (music: Christian Rich feat. Little Dragon & Vic Mensa – “Dripping Summers” / applause) Kehinde Hassan Thank you. Torsten Schmidt So, who’s the woman singing there? Kehinde Hassan Yukimi from Little Dragon. Torsten Schmidt So, that’s a mildly different area to touch on than certain other areas that you played with before. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, we’ve been trying to work with them for five, six years. Our publisher hooked us up with their label at the time and we did a remix for them and then we just traded favors, did a remix we didn’t charge them we did a song they didn’t charge us. So yeah, it’s that simple. And they turned that in, in like an hour. Once they were off tour or whatever what’s this like three weeks ago she gave us the song on Wednesday, no yeah, Wednesday and we put the song out on Thursday the next day. And Vic did his verse quickly and sent it. Torsten Schmidt How’s the process different when you have something like that in mind compared to I don’t know getting something for Wale? Taiwo Hassan In what sense? Torsten Schmidt Just when you produce the actual track? Taiwo Hassan Well, the Wale song was a beat that we had around. It was a Christian Rich beat for our project and we had that beat around. That was actually the original beat that beat was supposed to be on Earl Sweatshirt’s album. The label really wanted him to use it. He didn’t use it because it was too pop for him. And then, somebody else picked it ... Kehinde Hassan A$AP Rocky and Swizz Beatz. Taiwo Hassan A$AP Rocky and Swizz Beatz. They had a song to it that was crazy. I heard it he played it for me. It was dope. Kehinde Hassan Yeah. Nicki Minaj was supposed to do it but she didn’t do it so then Wale ended up using it. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, Wale really, really wanted to use it, so we let him use it. But with Wale it’s us as producers so it was a little different when you do that. But this is our own song so we’re curating exactly who we want on that beat, how we want it to sound, and how we want the song to come out. So, it’s two different processes as far as when it’s our own project and when it’s someone else’s for their album. So, just two different processes. Torsten Schmidt Because you can tell melodically and harmonically it’s a very different thing than all the Earl stuff, for example. Taiwo Hassan Yeah, I mean nowadays we’ve always been super into melodies and chords and all that but we just happened to work with a lot of rappers, so it’s been hard for people to know that we really get into all those dreamy places. So this song is nice to finally put out. Torsten Schmidt Before we get to those session files now what’s the story with that thing on Instagram, that video? Kehinde Hassan Oh Will. Taiwo Hassan Will Smith, yeah. Kehinde Hassan So, that’s why we were in Budapest for five days. Will wanted us to come out to record. We did a whole bunch of songs. He was doing something out there and obviously he went there for five days. Taiwo Hassan He talks about it. He was shooting a movie. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, he was shooting a movie. And we just got in the room, star struck. I was probably star struck for a few hours, couldn’t really work. He had to take over because it was kind of like he was treating us like his little brothers, so he was just telling us mad information, just super cool. And we use the information to make the song. So, he was just like, “I want to make new songs, and I want this idea and that idea.” And we just started feeding him beats and Will writes, he really writes. He’ll just sit down and be like, “Oh yeah, I got a rap to that.” And he’ll just go in, boom, got his song. And yeah, we just develop a relationship with him and he was like, “Yo, I’m gonna use one of these songs.” And we didn’t really get a warning it was more like 10 seconds before he put on Instagram, “Yeah I’m putting this on Instagram I’m gonna add your name.” But I kept egging him on to put that song out because he had a line in the song that said something about LeBron leaving Miami. Torsten Schmidt Good line, though. Taiwo Hassan And then once LeBron went to LA, I was just like, “Yo you should put that out and just say Cleveland instead of Miami.” So, I wrote that one word, Cleveland. Torsten Schmidt Do you get writers credits for that? Taiwo Hassan Yeah, we always get writers credit. Kehinde Hassan Always. Taiwo Hassan But that song is dope just because it is the one song he actually sat down and wrote. He had it pre-written already, he just knocked it out. And we weren’t supposed to use the beat because its just the loop, it’s a sample. And we did a bunch of other versions really trapped out, because he wanted something like “Ghost” but he ended up going with that Gary Glitter vibe. Torsten Schmidt Gary Glitter vibe, yeah? Kehinde Hassan Vibe, vibe the Gary Glitter vibe. Taiwo Hassan Y’all know who Gary Glitter is? OK. We just gonna talk about the music with him, just leave it there. Torsten Schmidt But how does that feel? Obviously, Will was always in a very particular place in hip-hop culture but a lot of our generation grew up listening to “Summertime.” At the same time seeing him in TV clowning. And then seeing him clowning on the big screen and blockbuster movies, and then he tries to compete on a beat with his son? Taiwo Hassan Nah, he can’t compete with his son he was the first rapper to ever win a Grammy, that’s it. And he boycotted the Grammy because they wouldn’t show hip-hop. Torsten Schmidt Well, speaking of young voices, we do want to give the chance to all the young voices in the room to ask their questions and to look a little deeper into how you actually go about arranging these tracks, and so on. But, not before we take the chance and give these two guys a big hand of applause and thank them for sharing with us. Taiwo Hassan Thank you. Kehinde Hassan Thank you. Taiwo & Kehinde Hassan Just, by the way, thank y’all for sitting here. Y’all look tired as fuck. Thank you for sitting through this whole rhetoric. Hot as fuck. So, thank you. Thank you for not falling asleep. Torsten Schmidt Before we get to the really important business of lunch, questions. Questions? Questions? Audience Member You sort of briefly it, but [I want to ask you] about writing splits. How did you guys maybe work that out when you were coming up? Taiwo Hassan Writing splits? Audience Member Writing splits. Because obviously, the law is like, 50% lyrics, 50% melody. But I feel like that really doesn’t reflect the way music is in 2018 because production is such a huge part of what a song is. So I was kind of wondering how you guys worked it, and how you guys feel about that? Taiwo Hassan As a producer, we kind of dictate the splits because everyone trusts that we know the writers and know who did what. So, generally when we produce a song, we, a lot of times don’t write the words, we make the beat. But we share in the writer’s share and the publishing share. We start off at 50% as a producer and then... Kehinde Hassan Then the other 50 is reserved for writing. Taiwo Hassan And sometimes you work your way down because, maybe, there’s four other writers on there and you want to be fair and give them some of your publishing and writing. But, generally speaking, yeah. 50% is yours as a producer. You don’t have to give that up. It just makes your life easier if you’re more lenient and share the publishing a bit. I heard that Kanye, from my old publisher, he just likes to give everybody publishing. He doesn’t care. And the publisher doesn’t like that. But you can do whatever you want. Torsten Schmidt Yeah, but he never does the accounting. And that’s one easy way of... Taiwo Hassan Right. Because he’s super in the creative space, so he just wants to give it away. Audience Member Did you always work it like that, like when you started? Kehinde Hassan Always. You always start at 50 because... Taiwo Hassan That’s just the old school thing we learned from working with EZ Elpee and those guys. You just start at 50, then you go down... Audience Member What if it’s another artist’s track, though? Kehinde Hassan For another artist’s track? Audience Member Yeah. An artist comes to you and say they want you to produce their track for them. Kehinde Hassan Yeah. We taking 50. I don’t care if I put a snare, I’m taking 50. Taiwo Hassan Yeah. Well, it depends. I mean, it’s also... Kehinde Hassan It depends. Taiwo Hassan It depends if you understand the mechanics of how that breaks down. We understand equations are big with publishing and mechanical rights, all that stuff. So, for us, we kind of have the advantage. We know how the numbers should be and how we want it to look so, yeah. Torsten Schmidt But all jokes aside. I mean, getting 50% is one thing. But if someone would actually never, or at least for years, do the accounting, then all you’re sitting with is the advance you got, right? Kehinde Hassan Nah. Taiwo Hassan You do paperwork. You do a producer’s... Kehinde Hassan We’re thorough with that stuff. Taiwo Hassan You have to do a long sheet, or at least a short form. Kehinde Hassan And a LOD, which is a letter of direction. So that’s where they know to send the money to.
If you’re working on a record and you’re not getting accounting statements... In your agreement, a general producer agreement, or a side artist agreement, there’s a part in there that says, “We can go and look at your books.” Taiwo Hassan Yeah. You can look at anyone’s books. Kehinde Hassan If you’re not getting accounting sheets every quarter, which is four in a year, you have the right to go and say, “OK. Let me see your books.” And you don’t have to forewarn them so they don’t cook the book. So you could just be like, “Yo, I need to look at your books right now. My CPA’s right here,” and you can see if you’ve been getting paid or not. Taiwo Hassan You got to finesse that in a good way, because if you start asking for accounting books and stuff, you’re probably going to mess up... Kehinde Hassan It could burn relationships. Taiwo Hassan Yeah. So you just have to be... Kehinde Hassan Be smart about it. Taiwo Hassan ...smart about how you investigate your royalties. But you definitely have the right to look into all that contractually, if you do the right contract. Torsten Schmidt That’s probably an interesting and valid point as well. Legally, you do have the option. But it’s the pretty nuclear solution. Like, there’s a good chance you’re not going to be working with those people for a long while. Taiwo Hassan It depends, you know, how much they want your art. If they like your music that much, it doesn’t matter. It just depends. If you make people hits and make them money, they don’t care. They’ll figure it out. Kehinde Hassan Great question, though. Taiwo Hassan I think she was having a question for a long time. Audience Member Hello. First of all, thanks for all the awesome stories. Their timeless, so don’t be afraid of just sharing them. So, I have two questions. Well, I actually have like, tons of questions, but, I’ll just keep it two. OK, first one is about female vocals on rap tracks. What do you think about that? Well, I want to know how do you work with them? How do you know that a female vocalist will work on a rap and how do you know it is going to work?
And the second question is about trap music. Because trap music right now is got to a point that it’s huge right now. So I want to know your opinion where do you think trap music is heading to? Taiwo Hassan I mean, to us it’s not rap music. It’s just music, so we can put a vocalist on anything. That’s how we look at it. It’s just music. It’s the same 12 notes... Kehinde Hassan 12 scales. There’s only so many scales in music. Taiwo Hassan If you look at music just as that, let people pick the genre. You just make the music. It doesn’t matter there’s a female, or male. If there’s a rapper or singer. As far as trap music, trap is not going to go anywhere because the trap is a real place. And it’s called crack house. So the idea of trap music will always be around. It’s turning pop now because different genres are taking it. But, trap is trap. That’s not going anywhere. Trap has been around... Kehinde Hassan That’s a real situation. Taiwo Hassan Afrika Bambaataa and those guys created trap with the 808s and stuff, and then Atlanta took it and made it... Kehinde Hassan They slowed it down a bit. Taiwo Hasssan Actually New Orleans took it first and made it... Kehinde Hassan Taiwo Hassan What’s that style they got? Bounce music. And then Atlanta and Miami, they kind of took it and made their own thing. So, trap is black music that’s not going anywhere. Black music doesn’t go anywhere. So, no, it ain’t going nowhere. Kehinde Hassan You’re just going to hear new artist trying to interpret the sound. Taiwo Hassan I would learn how to use 808s because them shits ain’t going nowhere. Just know that. Audience Member Hey, what’s up guys? Kehinde Hassan Damn. Nice. Barry White and shit. Audience Member Good evening, good evening everyone. But, no. I just wanted to ask... because I didn’t realize you guys had lived in Atlanta, and I’m from Memphis originally. I was going to say that was another like, birthplace of trap music, too. Kehinde Hassan Where? Audience Member Memphis. Kehinde Hassan Oh, word. Audience Member Yeah. Taiwo Hassan Wait, real quick. We got a version of that Will Smith song with a Memphis rapper doing the hook. Audience Member Who is it? Taiwo Hassan I don’t know. I just found it on some mixtape. I should play that before you’re done. Audience Member Yeah. I would actually like to hear that. I was just curious because you were saying y’all were in Atlanta, what? In like, ‘07-’08, kind of? Kehinde Hassan Yep, yep. Audience Member And I was just curious what the
Atlanta scene was like at that time. Because I moved from Memphis to LA and the whole southern-to-LA change is a really big change. So I was just wondering what the Atlanta scene was like at that time and how different LA felt when y’all first moved there? Kehinde Hassan Atlanta, it was a mixture of what you would call weirdo music, like they said in the XXL magazine. Not “weirdo” to us, but like... Taiwo Hassan Back then was D4L and... Kehinde Hassan D4L. Taiwo Hassan “Laffy Taffy” Kehinde Hassan “Laffy Taffy,” but then there was
the kid named Prototype, like, kind of doing the Outkast music. Then there was... Taiwo Hassan Gucci was really doing his thing. Kehinde Hassan Gucci Mane was just coming up with Jeezy. By that time, Young Jeezy was still doing mix tapes. There’s this producer named Shawty Redd. That trap sound really came from his production. Then you had Zaytoven. I think he was just bubbling around then. But, it was really Shawty Redd. Shawty Redd was producing all of Jeezy’s stuff, so that was the sound. But it felt cool. It was great energy. Taiwo Hassan We were working with Bangladesh. Kehinde Hassan Bangladesh. Bangladesh. We worked with him down there. Taiwo Hassan His house was around the corner from ours. Kehinde Hassan His sound was always weird, in a good way. Because he would take these 808s, and really, if you took the drums out, it was like Berghain music. Taiwo Hassan It was techno. Super techno. Kehinde Hassan Very techno. Detroit techno, but he would put trap drums on them. That’s how you got the “A Milli” record. It was just him messing around. Audience Member [inaudible] Oh, yeah, yeah. Kehinde Hassan Yeah, yeah. Exactly. Taiwo Hassan And “Bossy.” Kehinde Hassan But, LA, you mean, like, LA when we got there in 2010? Audience Member Yeah, was that kind of like a stark transition? Just like a weird change? Taiwo Hassan We came from New York. We went to New York and then LA. Kehinde Hassan Yeah. From Atlanta, we went to New York for like two or three years, and then LA. On both coasts was this resurgence of undergound artists like [Kid] Cudi. So when we were doing music in New York, it was Cudi, us, Wale, Drake, Mickey Factz- Taiwo Hassan J. Cole. Kehinde Hassan J. Cole. We knew J. Cole back then, just running into each other in the streets. It was just like, new artists wanting to do something different and not depending on the older artists for the co-signs. It was just like, “Let’s just do our own thing.” And then when we got to the West coast, same thing. Discovered Odd Future. Somebody played it for us in the hotel. We were like, “That Earl kid is dope.” Then we end up working with him. Who else was around in the West Coast? Taiwo Hassan I thing Tyga started to do his thing. Kehinde Hassan Tyga, Ty Dolla Sign. YG, [DJ] Mustard, “Toot It and Boot It,” and all that kind of stuff.
Very interesting records, you know? And it was amazing to see those guys take it in their own way. So we learned from that. That’s how we got “Big Fish,” the song. We were paying attention to those guys. Mustard still has such a crazy run. We were like, “If he’s doing it well, why don’t we just adopt the sound?” And it worked. So, yeah. Kehinde Hassan My man with the Reeboks. Y’all got the same Reeboks. Audience Member Yeah. Kehinde Hassan No, those are nice. Taiwo Hassan Product placement. OK. Kehinde Hassan Y’all get a check for that? Taiwo Hassan See, I don’t know about that. Audience Member Yeah. They were just in the hotel room, so. I just wanted to ask how much emphasis you guys put onto mixing your own beats? Or, if you guys have specific engineers you like working with? Because I know that makes a difference. I’ve seen sessions where it’s more of a jam thing into a Pro Tools situation. They have somebody else handle the nitty gritty stuff. Or, if you really like to get into your own mixes? Taiwo Hassan Well, we mix everything before we send it to our engineer. Our main engineer is our boy, Stan Greene, who mixed “Ghost.” He mixed... Kehinde Hassan Rihanna’s stuff. Taiwo Hassan Yeah. He mixed a bunch of stuff. Kehinde Hassan Big Sean. Taiwo Hassan We used to hoop together, but that’s our guy. But we mix everything, and then we send it to him just to give it that clean... make sure it’s not hitting the red. Our mixes we can just put out, but we prefer him to do the final mixes. Audience Member Second question is, how much emphasis do you guys put into naming your beats? Kehinde Hassan Great questions. Taiwo Hassan The beats usually become the names of the songs. Kehinde Hassan We know a lot of producers, they’ll name their tracks the day they made them. The dates. And we always tell them, “Yo, title your tracks. That energy transfers. That’s how you sell it.” So, “Crawl” is the name of the beat. Kehinde Hassan “Señorita” is the name of the beat. What else? “Centurion,” that was the name of the beat. We called it “Crime Of The Century.” And then he changed it to “Centurion.” But usually, I can know when I’m not going to sell a track. If the title is wack, I’m like, “Damn.” It’s the energy. For some reason, people can see the words and get the idea of what you were thinking. So, for us it’s important. But, maybe not so much. I don’t know. For us it is. Audience Member No. I feel that. Thank you. Audience Member I was wondering how you deal with being stuck in creativity? I mean, there’s a lot of pressure, especially in this big industry. Like everyone making music sometimes deals with being stuck. Kehinde Hassan Oh, like writer’s block? Audience Member Yeah. Taiwo Hassan Oh. Yeah, I had that for like, a few years. Kehinde Hassan Movies. I watch movies. Taiwo Hassan Do things you like. Because, naturally, I think it inspire the next thought, just that inspired thought. I’ve had writer’s block for many years. I just kind of got back into it last year. Kehinde Hassan And I have my moments, too. I let him create stuff and I just, like, piggyback. Or, I’ll create, he piggyback. It just depends. Taiwo Hassan Or just, live your creativity. The writer’s block would be less if you just live your creativity. You’re just doing it. You’re getting inspired by things. You make a mental note or maybe take a picture, whatever. Do a voice note. But if you live your creativity, then, it will never stop. It just keeps going. And if there is a block, then there’s something else you have to kind of meditate to get the blockage out or something. If you live your creativity, it’ll be less and less of a writer’s block. Does that make sense? Torsten Schmidt Let’s thank these guys again. Kehinde Hassan Thank you, guys. Taiwo Hassan Thank you.
[applause]
[laughter]
(video: clip from the film Kasoor featuring the song “Zindagi Ban Gaye Ho Tum”)
[plays snippet of a beat]
[applause]
[laughter]
[applause]

---

Title: Damo Suzuki
Date: 2018-10-16
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/damo-suzuki

Damo Suzuki
Krautrock is a broad, catchall genre that encompasses the many permutations of experimental rock music created by German bands in the ’70s. But one of krautrock’s greatest ironies is that the lead singer for one of the genre’s leading bands was born in Japan. Vocalist and musician Damo Suzuki left home in his late teens and began busking around Europe. During one streetside performances, he attracted the attention of Holger Czukay and Jaki Liebezeit, the bassist and drummer for the band Can. Suzuki became the lead vocalist for Can from 1970 to 1973, writing and singing on the band’s most enduring albums, including Tago Mago, Ege Bamyasi, and Future Days. Praised for their fusion of psychedelic rock, funk, and avant-garde noise, as well as Suzuki’s freeform, multilingual, and often improvisational lyrics, these albums went on to influence members of bands like the Sex Pistols, Jesus & Mary Chain and Radiohead. Though Suzuki stopped making music altogether for several years, he returned in 1983 to front Damo Suzuki’s Network, under which he travels the world to improvise and record with local bands. His 2018 album with German experimental band Jelly Planet explores the limits of krautrock while affirming his status as a genre legend.
In his lecture at the 2018 Red Bull Music Academy in Berlin, Damo Suzuki discussed his philosophy on what he calls “instant composing,” the importance of spirituality in making music and his Never Ending Tour.
Hosted by Anupa Mistry Good morning, or afternoon, everyone. Quick reminder, please if we can have phones off in the room, and also if we can save questions, which we will happen after the conversation, and limit them to the participants only, at least at the beginning, because it’s their experience here to learn. Our next guest is best known for a brief but very fruitful period spent as the vocalist for the seminal Krautrock band Can from 1970 to 1974. His capricious vocals… Damo Suzuki ’70 to ’73. Anupa Mistry ’70 to ’73. Damo Suzuki Yes. Anupa Mistry ’73. 1970 to 1973, his vocals graced some of the band’s most acclaimed records, such as Tago Mago, Ege Bamyasi, and Future Days. And, this music went on to influence many of probably your favorites from across genres. But, he’s gone on to spend much of the last three decades on a never-ending tour, continuing to challenge the conventions of the music industry by playing improvisational shows around the world with local musicians. Please welcome Mr. Damo Suzuki. Damo Suzuki Thank you very much. Nice to see you here. So, I would say good morning, because I just wake up. I hope you enjoy this. Nice to meet you everybody. That’s a good amount of the people, because I can see almost everybody. Normally, I have a glasses on, so actually I cannot see you at all. Anupa Mistry Well, everyone can maybe come up and shake your hand after, if you’d like to see their faces more clearly. We’d emailed quite briefly ahead of this chat, and you wanted to maintain the spirit of spontaneity for this conversation. Can was a very long time ago, and you said, “I’m here for the now.” Damo Suzuki It’s almost a half-century ago. Nobody over here is having life. You know, it’s a long ... Anupa Mistry I thought it might be useful for some of the young musicians in this room to see what you were doing when you were around their age. I wanted to play a short video. This is a performance of Can’s “Vitamin C” from 1972. If we can play video number one. (video: Can - “Vitamin C”) That was a clip of “Vitamin C” by Can. You’re about 22, 23 years old at that time. Damo Suzuki I guess so, I cannot remember. It’s a very, very long time before. Anupa Mistry You weren’t watching the video while it was playing. How does it make you feel? Damo Suzuki Not really good. I don’t feel really so ... It’s not me, you know. Anupa Mistry What do you mean? Damo Suzuki Time gap isn’t quite many. Because I’m doing something else now, and I’m already near to 70 years old. It’s just different, so if I listen and things like this, I’m watching at my own kids or something like this. Anupa Mistry Yeah. Does the nostalgia and the meaning that other people have for that music carry any value to you? Damo Suzuki I don’t know, because it’s a so strange thing. I was together with Can for only three years, but strangely, every 10 years people is remembering Can, and doing something like a first album. There is a punk time, and also hip-hop people like to have this one. New wave and electro things. It’s so strange, because people are all the time sort of remembering. Because it’s could have be a one reason why we are five people, but the five people came from a different music direction. Two of the people is studied by Stockhausen, and the one was a free jazz drummer. One was a younger guitarist. I was just a hippie from the street. Just a different kinds of people who came together. That’s quite interesting still. If we re-did it, only same likeness, sort of music, and everybody like this music, then it don’t get farther for development of the music. Damo Suzuki You need many different kind of informations. Then you can make much more interesting things, not just concentrating on only one things. Also it’s the same like food. Because I like to speak about food, because I really like to eat food too. Food is also slow, if you eat, you like this food, and if you eat every day, then it doesn’t make any effect anymore, you know. Music is also, you take many different kind of a thing. Don’t listen to only one music, because if you are having only music, your creativity is limited. If you have many interests, you must be curious about many things. Not only the music, but the social movement or political. Many things. It’s around yourself everything is happening, so you must take it and have really interest on it. Then you can make really something quite special for you. Anupa Mistry I think we’ll definitely explore some of these different interests of yours as we get into the conversation. I do want to stay a little bit in the past only because I think it’s very interesting that your arrival in Europe. You left Japan while you were a teenager. Clearly, from a very young age, you were willing to stake your own path. Can you talk a little bit about what Japan was like at the time when you left and why you chose to come to Europe? Damo Suzuki I don’t know how many of you are coming from island like New Zealand or Japan or some kind of island. If you are in the island, you have a dream to go to the continent. That is in me too also at that time. That time was 1968 I first left Japan. It was much different situation like now. It’s not usual to travel to another country. Also, social involvement is not really good at that time. There was almost no flight. Only ship and things like this. If you are living in such situation, you have much dreams than today because today you can go to London for maybe 80 euros or something like that. It takes only one hour or something like that. Traveling itself is very easy. At that time, it was kind of adventure. Once you left the country, then you might never come back again. It’s kind of things are totally different. I think now is much better because everybody can go to see any other country and quite cheap. You can go to anywhere, and you can meet many different people. You have opportunity now, so you can make many things that we couldn’t make at that time. Anupa Mistry Were you always curious from a young age? What was the impulse to leave? Damo Suzuki Yes, I was not really good in school, so I thought I better don’t stay in Japan because I can get not really good future. Another side is only one good things in my school time was geography. It was my hobby. When school was over, come back home, and open the atlas, and I’m dreaming to go to somewhere. Besides that I always like adventures. That’s why I came to Europe. I think it was really good because I born as Japanese, but that is not a meaning I must all the time, all life long stay like a Japanese. Everybody’s birth, you didn’t choose. You’re American, whether you’re from a rich family or poor family. Any kind of thing, you never choose with yourself. Why not? If you’re getting a little bit older, 17, 18 years old or more, you choose your place to live. Anupa Mistry Why did you choose to come to Europe then? Damo Suzuki Yes, because if I’m living in Japan. We had many information from the States because we lost World War II. So because we lost the war, so all winner cultures coming to this loser country. I was not so much into American culture for this reason, so I came to Europe. Before that I wrote letters to many newspaper in Europe to get some sponsors because I didn’t have so much money. How can I live in Europe? In Sweden, there is a newspaper, and they wrote about me. Then after I got 21 letters from Sweden. “If you come to Sweden, I can take care of you,” and things like this. That’s why I come to Europe. This is the main reason. Anupa Mistry You lived in a commune for a bit when you were in Sweden? Damo Suzuki No, it’s not true. If people is talking to another people, sometimes stories get totally different. I was not living in a commune. It was a small village with only 50 people living in the middle of almost nowhere in Sweden. Even Swedish people don’t know this place, where it is, such a place. I liked being in such a place because I’m not fond of big cities. If you live in a big city, you have so much stress and not necessary things. You get travel problems or things like this. I really didn’t have this kind of thing. I wanted to live as naturally as possible because it’s much more easy to live this way. Anupa Mistry What was it like being Japanese in Europe at that time, the mid-to-late-’60s? Damo Suzuki It’s totally different because there was not every corner was a Japanese sushi place or things like that. Maybe even Chinese people was not so much there at the end of ‘60s. Totally different. Even you can hear many different kind of restaurant, Vietnamese or something like that. This kind of stuff is not. Only maybe Italian or Yugoslavian food or something like this. That was all. Anupa Mistry It was okay, your experience? Was it difficult? Damo Suzuki No, no, it’s not so difficult, because I like adventures. I can take it as it comes. It’s much more easy way. I really don’t like to have any plans. She was asking me to do something today, some kind of a script or something like this. I said, “No, it’s not really good. Make it natural as possible, because I like to improvise stuff.” If you improvise, it’s much more honest really with yourself and much more personalized. If you already planned, then you go to same direction all the time, and so you are not free. That’s why I like this kind of a platform, all the time we improvise things. Anupa Mistry When you were moving from place to place within Europe, how did you know it was your time to move on to somewhere else? Damo Suzuki Actually, I didn’t think anything. Maybe tomorrow, whether it’s good, then I go to this place. Things like that. It was not so complicated. Just easy. For me, my lifelong philosophy is be myself. Be just Damo Suzuki. For me, it’s the best way. It’s the easiest way so I can make it. Anupa Mistry How did you develop this personal philosophy? What we often read or hear about Japanese culture is that it’s not as rooted in the individual. You said this philosophy has been a lifelong thing. Where did those ideas come from? Damo Suzuki I think it comes from a kind of provocation. I told you before, I was living in the middle of American culture. It was not me. I was forced to take this culture because of the World War. I think it has everything to do with provocation all the time. I really like to have any kind of provocations against authority and against capitalism or anything like this. I told you, I like smaller cities, small villages because I really don’t like big cities because there’s many, many problems. I like to stay... I think it just began with kind of provocations. All the time, I’m provocating. Indeed, provocation is one of the most important things for creative activities. Without this, you cannot go farther. Your energy is also important. You cannot go farther without any kind of provocation. Anupa Mistry Obviously, you’re talking about the American influence in Japan as a big provocation for you. Can you talk about maybe some of the different kinds of provocations or prompts that some people in here, some of the musicians in here, might encounter, draw inspiration from? Damo Suzuki Yes, but I don’t like to talk of many things that I’m thinking. Everybody here is maybe 30, 40 years younger than me, and they have their own life to lead. They must develop with myself. I’m just 40 years older. Actually, it’s not really good space to talk about. I’m not a real person, so you can choose just anybody else. Everybody has a different kind of experiences. That’s why I don’t like to talk so much about this. You are here. Society is here. Any kind of energy you must make to the people, you get energy back from the people. This is most important things because music is communication. Music without communication [does] not exist. That’s why I’m doing these things quite a long of time, kind of improvisation. I don’t say it’s improvisation. Instant composing. Anupa Mistry You call it instant composing? Damo Suzuki Yes, for me it’s quite important to have all the time new words. Because if you say improvisation, it’s kind of jazz people are doing this. Actually, improvisation is not that good meaning. If you invite somebody, maybe three people you invite for your party or something like that or meeting, suddenly came five people or much more people, then you say, “I improvised something.” It’s not so really good. I use instant composing because we are composing on the stage. Also, quite important for me is the instant composing — ‘I-N-G.’‘I-N-G’ is just now and at the moment. This is the point that for my music making is quite important. It’s just at the moment. That’s why I use ‘I-N-G.’ If you use ‘I-N-G,’ ‘I-N-G,’ ‘I-N-G,’ for maybe 20 or 30 times, you can try to say it. Then it suddenly sound like ‘energy.’ Energy is most important thing for our substance to living and to understand anything and to involve in anything. Energy is the most important thing. It depend if you have positive energy or negative energy. I hope everybody going to get positive energy. If you have positive energy, you can make other people also happy. This person get positive energy, and this person to another people going. Then our world is going to step-by-step getting better way. Anupa Mistry This is something that you’ve spoken about, which is that you’re not so in favor of grand statement or a grand gesture or product. Instead you prefer more of a step-by-step approach, more one to one communication. Can you talk a little bit about the potential of that? Damo Suzuki Communication today is everywhere because, as I told you, I’m making a concert with just random musicians who I never met before. We make sound check, then we go on the stage. Even I don’t select musicians. It’s not my task. I ask my local promoter, “You can choose some interesting musicians from local music scene,” because they know much more about me anyway for local scene. Some of the promoters did already maybe ten more times arranged my show, they’re going to make some problem with me because they know that I make many different things. Sometimes they arrange some noise maker, but not really loud noise. Just so small noise. [imitates noises] All four noisemaker with this one, and I must make music with this. Things like that is coming. For me, it’s welcome because I like adventures. Any kind of sensation I like to make, things like that. That’s also provocation, too. It’s quite against the social system. It’s not industry. It’s not things like that. I’m really happy to doing things like this. Maybe I get out of the point. Anupa Mistry No, no. [laughs] I find that interesting and the fact that you have had this approach to life for such a long time. Working in a band for three years, how was that experience with respect to this theory of spontaneity and unplanned collaboration? You’re in a very regimented almost environment. Damo Suzuki Yes, but I don’t like to make it anymore. This is three years with the same people. I’m not so interested more to belong to any kind of organization or any kind of a group. I’m not so much interesting about this because I like to be free with myself. That means I’m just kind of provocating all the time. Also I’m searching for something. Maybe I didn’t find it. Maybe I found it. I don’t know because I really don’t like to have any kind of answers. If you have answer, already you can ditch your goals. It’s quite boring for me. That’s why I’m making this kind of music, because it is not product. Product is already you have answer. I don’t like to have a product. I like just the processing, high energy-ing. Things like this. This actually fits together with me to how I’m living. If you are making music, you must be yourself. Also your personality and everything involved must be equal to music. Otherwise you cannot make honest music. Anupa Mistry I think that might be a good place for us to get a sense of what you’re talking about here in terms of your tour, your Never Ending Tour. Can we play a clip from the Neverending documentary? This is a bit of live performance and a little bit of interview. Anupa Mistry That was a clip from Francesco Di Loreto’s 2005 documentary about you called Neverending. There’s a couple of things in there. You said, “Cooking is like anarchy.” You kind of elaborate on that point because you say all you need are these basic things: salt, fat, heat. You can make something. What are the basic elements of your music making? Is there anything that you consider that you just need? Damo Suzuki Yeah. Now I’m doing different than before because I was with a group and composing together and things like that. Now I’m quite interesting. Every night I perform together with different people that I never met before. I don’t know any technical things about them. Also music tastes, I don’t know. Sometimes I perform with a country western guitarist or things like that. Total different music. Sometimes with a brass band. Sometimes with 50 people and 35 singers. Sometimes with disabled people. All the time different. I can’t compare this and this because it’s how I am. As I told you, music is communication, because I like people. That’s why I can make anytime just things. Every country different. Every city different. Sometimes I perform together with only females, and how I can say... Anupa Mistry It seems like the only thing you need is an element of the unknown. Damo Suzuki Yeah, because it’s kind of a skill. It my quiet ego. I like to have adventure, because otherwise my life is quite boring. Just doing every time same things, understanding the same things so that I cannot make it. When I was a teenager, I used to travel and busk on the street. Just I cannot stop this kind of things. If you eat really good food and you taste it, then you cannot forget this taste. I’m doing things like that. Without it, I think my life is quite empty. Anupa Mistry I like the idea that... Well, we should also clarify and say that you pretty much only perform live. There are not too many studio recordings that you’ve put out over the last 30 plus years of touring. There are some live recordings, there’s a couple of studio recordings, some of which we will play, but you prefer live. I think all of this stuff that you’ve talked about here, your theories, seem conducive to the spontaneous environment. Do you feel like that gives you and all of the different participants, the musicians and the audience, a new sense of ownership over the music? Damo Suzuki I look at just a moment. That next moment, I don’t know what’s going to happen. I like this kind a skill more than already brand. I know already clearly and I have an answer. I don’t need any kind of answer. That means I don’t like to have any kind of information. Information is killing me too much. If you have so much information... For instance, for you is a music period. If you have many information about the music, then you don’t have so much space to create with yourself. If you don’t have so much information, you can go any kind of place, and that’s the best thing can do: creative activity. I don’t need any kind of information. That’s why I like this moment. I don’t know... just musicians and I don’t know anything about them. Even I don’t know their history and so nothing I know of them. We make some special moment and this is for me really humanlike, because long time before we begin with the music this way to communicate with another people, but I don’t think at that time we made our music, just a different kind of folks is on the hill and making some signal with smoke. This is the beginning of the music, I think. Not really like music. It’s kind of a signal. Anupa Mistry It’s also a more unique experience for someone to come and see you, to see something special you do that night or talk to someone who’s next to them in the audience versus just listening to a CD, which everyone is going to listen to in the same way. It’s not just you getting something out of it. It’s everyone in the room getting something out of it. Damo Suzuki Yeah, one thing that I really don’t like from modern music is it’s quite too short, three minutes, four minutes, five minutes and things like that. It’s not natural. It’s just they make things like that for radio station or something like that. Besides the music, some kind of things are working on, so I did it on track. That’s why, at the moment, I only listen to classical music, because it’s much longer and for me it’s a natural thing. You can praise three minutes improvisation, [but] it’s not possible to make only three minutes improvisation. Life itself is not cut off for three minutes or five minutes or something like that. It’s not so really necessary. If you play something, you don’t just don’t like to stop. That’s why my longest pieces on a CD is a 77 minutes for one piece. Why not? Because nobody else is doing like this. Anyway, I think every kind of artist, a musician, a painter, whoever is involved in art, their task is stealing the time of another people. That’s why I really like to take much of my time as possible from the people. Anupa Mistry 77 minutes is the longest on recording. What about live? Damo Suzuki Live is sometimes two and a half hours [and] only one piece. Anupa Mistry Then you’ll do another piece after that maybe? Damo Suzuki Maybe people will like it, but actually I don’t like to play that much more because only one piece is enough with so many elements inside. Many different parties coming sometimes really so angry, sometimes really calm and gentry and many different things are happening in one piece. For me this way to make music is quite natural. No, I’m not thinking that that is the music. I’m just much more following something else that I can create a much more platform with the people for a platform of the communication. Music is for me is just a tool to make this platform, I think. Anupa Mistry What are you feeling while you’re kind of in that moment? Damo Suzuki Yes, it depends on the... I am just always very thankful that that I have such opportunity and I can meet every time so nice people and we create our own time. We control our time and we can share this energy to the audience. This is the most beautiful moment, even for just happiness. Sometimes I’m crying. Anupa Mistry Do you have any – not precautions, I don’t know if that’s the right word – but is there anything that you need to do to avoid negative energy impacting you? Damo Suzuki No, negative energy is not so much important for me. I don’t like to have this. If some of the players like to play with me, if the name of the band is something to do with say Satan or devils or something like that I said, “No, I don’t like to play with you because I don’t like to have this kind of stuff. Also somebody is following involved in the dark music.” This world is so dark enough so why you wish to play dark music? Why you just shouldn’t make people much more happy with this? Anupa Mistry What do you consider to be dark music? Damo Suzuki Something to do with Satan, Satanism, and things like that. There’s so heavy metal bands playing like this with just signs and things like that, even though they don’t know what’s the meaning, what it’s saying. But if you know all these signs, then maybe you just think it’s totally different. Anupa Mistry You’ve also talked a lot about taking inspiration from and enjoying playing around the world with young people. Damo Suzuki Yes, very young people. Last time in London, I know of a venue. I performed in just a small venue, maybe more than 10 times. The promoter knew that I like to have adventures. Last time I performed together with 18 years old band. Five people is 18 years old, but they are totally good. For such as young age, they make really good music, as if they are already 30 or 40 years old. It was a really nice experience, too. The youngest one who ever performed with me was a 15-year-old guitarist. It was also nice, and 10 years later I performed together with just the same person. I can see development, and it’s a nice moment to see, [someone] growing up. Anupa Mistry I think sometimes older people think that young people don’t have something of value to offer. Damo Suzuki No, no, no. I think young people have much more interest because they don’t have so really clearly perspective. If you don’t have a perspective – no, you have perspective to make something in the music field, but you’re not so much experienced in life itself. That’s why it’s quite interesting, because, if you have so much information you cannot be creative. If I perform with somebody already 40 or 50 years old, they have already kind of musical style and they’re never going to change. But I really like to perform with younger people or with a young nation. For instance, like last time I performed in Albania, Kosovo, but they have something of which I don’t have. For me it’s also a learning process still now to play together with young people, and I can get something from them. Not they aren’t getting [something] from me singing. So there is always this kind of thing. There’s also communication, so I’m taking them something and I give them something. Anupa Mistry What are you taking from them? Damo Suzuki Oh, energy. Young energy is totally different than our energy, and also ideas. Many people here is a generation of computer generation. My time was nothing to do with computer. It’s much more interesting to make music itself because everybody would be creating so many different things because you don’t have to learn how to play guitar or something like that. But if you are keen on technical things, then you can go some different way than I went. That’s quite interesting, and I learn many things from young people. If I don’t have this process by myself, it’s, I think, quite a boring life. There’s so many possibilities, because we have so many brain cells. I don’t know how many, but you must use it, actually. Then you get some interesting ideas and creativty or maybe you can find a total different things. For instance, if you have some apple you can see from here and you can see from here, you can see from here and you can see from, but it’s not all. If you cut it so you can see another things. Then you can maybe get a quarter of it. Then you have a different kinds of things you can see. That is so much different things you can see for only one thing. There’s so many things to learn from young people because young people’s results are unlimited, but older people is already quite limited because they like to have a secure life and things like that, which is not that much important. But they like to have security, to get two children, a car, a house, and things like this. But younger people don’t think things like this. [They think] much more real natural things. Passion, longing, and things like this. That’s things I can learn from many young people. Anupa Mistry What is Damo Suzuki’s Network? Damo Suzuki Yes, Damo Suzuki’s Network [began in] 1997, so almost 10 years I didn’t make music. One promoter invited me to come to Japan, so then I must make a band, and I asked some friends to come. That was the beginning of the Network. Almost three years long I performed together with my friends for every two tours for different people. But since March 19, 2003, I changed my opinion about making a network. [That day] was a historical moment because there were many demonstrations on the street and many people was against bombing Iraq. But America ignored, and I was quite angry, too. That same day I flew from San Francisco via Las Vegas to John F. Kennedy Airport. Early in the morning I heard this news. I was already bad feeling and also angry. I thought maybe I can make something, but I’m not the kind of person of playing big tantrums or something like that. I thought maybe I can make something step-by-step to get communication between the people. Music itself is a communication, so if there is many communication, there is no violence. Violence is not only in a battlefield. [We fight] in a family, in a social, in the office or school. There’s many [forms of] violence. I thought so I can use this power with the music as a weapon against violence. That’s the beginning of the network projects. Now, I’m doing so. That means I go to another place and perform together with only local sound carriers, because it’s a much more near to the audience. I don’t bring in somebody from far together with me anymore. I just go there alone and create in the time and space of the moment. Anupa Mistry Why is your tour called the Never Ending Tour? Damo Suzuki Yes. Never Ending Tour is because I’m quite egoistic, so I like to do long as possible and so as long as I exist, I may travel and I make music and this is a passion of which make me a stable in my life. Anupa Mistry You were diagnosed with colon cancer and you’ve had some surgeries. How did your illness impact your ability to be spontaneous, but also your ideas of never ending? Does it bring up questions of mortality? Damo Suzuki Yes. For me, music is healing. I think music helped me quite a lot, but besides that I’m quite a religious person. I’m a believer in the Bible. Both together. For me, it’s important to make music that I have such an experience, bad experience really it’s so hard, three and a half years without any freedom, and I must stay in the hospital for so long time. I survived. Now my mission is to give somebody information or to give somebody possible feeling who have the same problem. I had the opportunity, so I survived. Why not? If I can support another people, then it’s the best thing I can do. Things like that I was doing with the music, too, because the music opens people’s mind and people’s perspective is getting more deeper and things like this. It’s quite important for me to do this as my mission. Everybody have kind of mission everybody but for my mission is like this. Anupa Mistry So you see never ending as something that will continue beyond you? Damo Suzuki Yes, never ending was actually for everybody’s dreams, so long as possible and access quite a natural dream or natural things like to live forever. I think because life itself is quite a giving, if you’re doing something interesting. It not shouldn’t be our only music than any kind of things, people who is working in a normal company, if they have a really good attitude and really good philosophy, they are really happier with this because he’s able to do this and able to spend his lifetime for this. It’s not to depend on the music. I’m telling you because I’m American music. That’s why it’s so, but there’s many interesting jobs you can get and you can develop with yourself and it’s always connecting with never ending because people don’t think that tomorrow, ‘I’m going to die and I’m going to live satisfied today, I’m going to make this and this.’ Then your life is quite tight already and planned already. Creativity is unlimited, so you can go many ways. That means energy flows all the time, and that is never ending. Then you can trust yourself, if you don’t have a time period that you must finish this and this. But if you are believing that you’re living for maybe 100, 200 or 300 years, then you can make many things. Because we are slaves with time, everybody. Use energy for a shorter period of time with people doing something, but instead you’re believing in something else. Then life gets much more rosy and much more interesting. You have unchained the feeling and you have your freedom. That’s the things. Anupa Mistry I wanted to play a piece of music that was actually recorded. This is a collaboration with the Japanese artist K-Bomb who also goes by Killer-Bong, and it’s from 2011 out Black Smoker Records and the project is called Killer-Damo. I’m going to pull that up. Anupa Mistry That was Damo Suzuki and Killer-Bong. I think that was recorded in 2011, and that was about a few minutes of a 32-minute piece of music that I just played. What does it take to get you into the studio to record something? Damo Suzuki No comment. [laughs] No, I just don’t like to go to the studio because against the machines. Machines are cool and [there is] not human warmness there. One of the most important factor of my kind of music is audience. Audience has the feedback and they have energy and they give me energy and is connecting together. This singing I cannot separate, and I cannot compare with the machines. Anupa Mistry That was recorded in studio or was there an audience there? Damo Suzuki Yeah, it was an audience together. Anupa Mistry There was an audience there? Damo Suzuki Yeah. Anupa Mistry OK, so then you were able to kind of... Damo Suzuki It was live concert. I just found that so many people stay there for so many hours of this kind of music. Anupa Mistry That was with a Japanese rapper. Damo Suzuki Yeah, Japanese rapper and Japanese DJs. This kind of people I never saw before, but to answer, again, I made a concert together with me. It was 2010. It was something like this. Anupa Mistry Is there a tradition of – you don’t like the word improvisational – but kind of a spontaneous music making in Japan? Damo Suzuki Not really. I don’t have so much of, so how it’s called, it’s fun or something. I don’t lack follower in Japan or even in Germany is also not so much. I mainly perform in England. 80% of the concert is in England. Anupa Mistry Well, it was interesting then that you were able to go back to Japan and meet with these young guys who are working in the same way as you. Damo Suzuki Yes, I did it until 2012 or 2011 or something like that. Now, I don’t go to especially to Japan because for problem with radiations and things like this. I’m not so and actually I don’t have anywhere I really like to stay for long times or. At the moment, I stay in Germany, but already since the 1970, so almost 50 years, but this is not my last station, because for me there is no last station. I continue to find somewhere nice. But the taste of the people is over time to time it changing. Now I’m sing something like this maybe three days after I sing a total different thing. Who know? Anupa Mistry Don’t quote him guys. Damo Suzuki This is almost like a way of politicians. They cannot remember anything that they say five days before. Anupa Mistry How can these people in the room maybe be a little less self-conscious or less fearful around their musical expression? Damo Suzuki What? I didn’t understand really, sorry about that. Anupa Mistry Maybe you can give some advice on how the musicians in this room might be able to channel some of what you’re doing, so being more trusting, I suppose, in the moment. Can you give some advice on how they might do that? Damo Suzuki Everybody is totally different, but just as a performer, don’t get nervous. Instead, you must be happy person because you have this opportunity to make a music that not many people have this kind of time, but do you have time. You must just enjoy yourself. If you are enjoying, there is already positive energy comes in the audience. They have only good concert. Nothing bad things happens, but many people is asking me before concerts, some is on the carrier, local sound carrier is asking me, “You don’t get nervous?” “No, I don’t get nervous.” I’m just happy to meet together with just audience and play music together, so is nothing else. It’s just my happiness. Anupa Mistry Find your happiness guys. Can you talk a little bit about the spirituality in this approach? Damo Suzuki Yes, so spirituality is just the beginning. If you believe in God exists or not, this is the beginning of everything, for every question. But many people don’t believe it, so I’m sure 90% of the people is not believe in a creator who created universe and human being and nature and everything. Many people you’re thinking as people who is believing God is something so strange person because why people must think that God doesn’t exist. For me, it’s kind of brainwashed because they don’t research anything. It’s not so much connecting with religion things or spiritual things, but if you doubt about with yourself, why you don’t research? Many people are just taking information from your father, mother, or a country, or many things. That’s why Japanese people is believing Buddhism and Hinduism, but actually they don’t know anything because it’s the traditions. Or maybe in England, [where] many people is believing in the Queen’s and the King’s family and things like this. This is something to do with traditions, but if you research many things, then you can find different perspective. [Being] curious about many things is actually [an] important thing to develop yourself. If you’re not curious, you never come to these spiritual things, because many think is a total against spiritual things. Believe in God because for instance, the TVs they are making all different information than reality and also newspapers and media is making like this. Also, you learn the history of something like this. History is also, like a lot of things, quite wrong, because they like the perspective from the winner’s country. The loser is always forgetting about from the history and things like this. If you look around the many things, there is things you doubt about things, but before that you must be curious about things, where you come from, who you are. This thing is quite important to know, and then you come slowly to spiritual things. [Humanity] was totally different a thousand years ago, because they didn’t have any kind of information. Now we have a wire of information all over the world. If you go to internet, you don’t know what is the truth. There’s many different kinds of perspectives and also conspiracy theories and things like this. Many things are happening, but now it’s very difficult to find their own truth. Beginning of the human being was also problem with information, so strange, but it was the information because snake give it to the Eve, “You should eat this one and if you eat this one you get this intelligent like God.” This was wrong information and now we are facing wrong information, too. The whole thing is quite connecting. If I talk about football and food... I can get anything connecting. Many things are connecting. Anupa Mistry How have your ideas of spirituality changed over the years? Does it change in response to kind of... Damo Suzuki Actually it’s different to change because I used to read the Bible, but I’m not a Catholic or a Protestant because they’re doing wrong things, too. They don’t read in the Bible. For instance, they’re celebrating 25th of December as the birth of Jesus Christ, but it’s not true. Nowhere in the Bible is a standing for them. For this one, for instance, I researched. Then I got the real result. 25th of December is actually birth of Nimrod. Nimrod is ancient Babylonian king. He was first person against God and made a kingdom after Noah’s stuff. People be celebrate this day? And also this Santa Claus. Santa Claus with white, gray beard. This looks like Odin in old ancient religion of Scandinavia. That’s why Santa Claus looks like this. Santa Claus, is the same coming from Nimrod. It’s so strange. If you really research many things, you can get so interesting point. That’s why I’m also spending quite a lot of time researching many things. Without get any result, I feel really bad. Maybe I cannot sleep three or four days, so I must have something to find, my truth and things like that. That is a spirituality very beginning, to compare what the church is doing at the moment, or Muslims or Buddhists or Hinduism or something like that. I’m connecting. I’m researching many things. Suddenly it comes that Vatican is not very good. They killed. They killed many people, too. You can find some kind of truth with this on history. That’s a really good thing. This is, for me, a quite good essence for my living. It’s kind of food, soul food, I can say. Anupa Mistry Do you make music by yourself ever, just when you’re at home? Damo Suzuki No. I don’t listen to any kind of music, not at all. Anupa Mistry You don’t make music? Damo Suzuki No, I listen to only classical music occasionally, but I don’t practice or anything. I just go everywhere like Damo Suzuki. It’s okay. If I cannot sing, I’m still Damo Suzuki. Just I go there and everything is okay. People is happy. They play together with me, things like that. I just don’t like to practice. Maybe I’m too lazy person. Maybe I’m hopeless person. It’s not right to sit here this place. That’s how I am, so I cannot change. Sorry. [laughs] [applause] Anupa Mistry I don’t know if I would say hopeless. I wanted to play one more piece of music. This was recorded in a studio with Jelly Planet. That was not in front of an audience. This came out this year, and it’s a track called... Damo Suzuki “Wildschweinbraten.” Anupa Mistry Yes, he gave me the German because I’m feeling self-conscious. Damo Suzuki Even I don’t know the title of the songs which I made. Anupa Mistry “Wildschweinbraten,” that’s it. (music: Damo Suzuki & Jelly Planet – “Wildschweinbraten” / applause) Anupa Mistry That was Damo Suzuki and Jelly Planet with “Wildschweinbraten.” It goes on for another ten minutes or so. Feel free to check it out. When you’re recording something in the studio, which is very rare, this is very rare for you, how are you doing your thing if there’s no people there, if there’s no audience there? Damo Suzuki Actually, they are my friend for a long time, since ’90s. They were recording in Cologne where I live. The guitarists called me up, “What are you doing? If you have the fun and the time, then you can just go to the studio. We are making this.” He didn’t told about we are going to make together recording. My wife there was cooking food for them. Anupa Mistry She was making Wildschweinbraten. Damo Suzuki Yes, Wildschweinbraten is soul food from Germany. That’s why this title is called “Wildschweinbraten.” Things like that. First of all, I didn’t know what’s going to happen. He just say to me, “When open at the studio, we’re going to improvise already.” Things like that happen. Anupa Mistry Is it difficult for you? Damo Suzuki No, no, no, it’s not difficult, but it’s so strange if you have only one booth for singer, and nobody is standing. The guitarist is somewhere else, the keyboard player is somewhere else. It, for me, is not so naturally separated. If on the stage, it’s total different because everybody is near to you. I can see faces and things like this. It’s much more communication there. Optical communication. It’s totally different. They recorded it, and they asked me, “What about? Maybe we’re going to do this.” I said, “It’s okay. We can make it, but it’s not my way.” Sometimes things like that happen by accident. I’m living always with accidents. It’s just really nice if we don’t plan and just happens. I say yes or no. That’s quite natural. Anupa Mistry Well, thank you for taking the time to say yes to coming here and interacting with us. Please, everyone, say thank you to Mr. Damo Suzuki. Damo Suzuki Thank you very much for taking the time with us here. I wish you a great creative activities in the future. We can see somewhere in the world again. I’m so happy if you talk to me. I was in Berlin Academy, and I saw you. If we see somewhere else, maybe in New Zealand or somewhere, it will be nice. Thank you very much for taking time and have a nice day. Thank you. Anupa Mistry We’ll actually do a few questions from the room. They’re going to ask you some questions. Audience Member Hi, thank you. I just wondered since you have this very free almost childlike spirit, which other people have to meditate for a whole lifetime, I wonder if you were just born like that or if you actually practice something? Do you meditate? You’re so free, and your spirit is so free. It’s something other people have to practice for a lot. Damo Suzuki Normal people, including me, you cannot remember when you were five years old, so I cannot say anything else. It’s just a game, and I don’t practice anything. I told you I’m so lazy person. Just happens. I take it as it comes because I just don’t like to do anything against natural flow. I like to live with this. If somebody come with me with this idea, then I like to work with it, if it’s good with my sense of living. Then I make it. I take just things which I like. It’s my freedom. I really don’t like to do things even I can make so much money doing this and spending my time for this bullshit. I really don’t like to do this. Actually, just what is coming naturally come. I was trying to live. I’m really happy being Damo Suzuki and nobody else. That mean that I’m not egoism or something like this. Best thing you can do is be yourself. It helps so much. Don’t be anybody else. It’s impossible to make it. You don’t need to copy somebody. It’s impossible. Audience Member Thank you. I have one more question. Damo Suzuki Yes, yes. You are not a lazy person. Audience Member You said that you are probably searching for something. I was wondering if you had any insights that you could share with us like life lessons. Just some wisdom that you maybe found in your music making that you feel like sharing? Damo Suzuki Sharing is actually... Like now, I said you must have your own experience to create because everybody is different. Even my self is different today. Maybe tomorrow totally different. Different idea and things like this. To involve in this life, actually you making things which you feel good at some moment. Not now, because now is really short time. Now doesn’t exist, but at the moment you can involve this one. You can do this as a person. You are using this time, and you can make something. Even there is many pressures and many people think it’s not get happen or it’s too difficult to make this. If you go one step forward, then many things are coming together with you are because you are moving place A to B. If you all the time stay in place A, then never happens anything. Every day same, same people, same situation. You cannot do anything else. If you go only one, maybe 30 centimetres or something like this, then total different atmosphere, you can get it. From this you can challenge your creativity and do something which is not compare with another people because every second, this moment, is your special moment. These are special moments if you catch it as often as possible, then you can make really your own things. To make your own things is good because for people’s eyes, this is the never ending music. You can hear it fresh 20, 30 years later also. You can hear it because it’s your music. If you are copying somebody else, music is always connecting with some kind of epoch. This is music from ’60s, ’70s or ’80s, and the texture is also from that time and social things. Then if you hear it it’s too old, and you cannot hear it. It’s always good to have a fresh surprise and you go together with this one. Also your philosophy is very important, what kind of philosophy you have. Always thinking really positive things because positive things bring you forward. You can develop. You can help people, too. This is an energy and just vibe to another people. That’s why I’m making music and nothing else. This is my mission, to make people, young people like here, to get much more creativity. Inside the creativity is many things, which is just your special moment. You must capture it. Audience Member Hi. I also do a lot of voice improvisations like you. I wonder how you make up lyrics and what do you think about when you improvise? Damo Suzuki Yes, many people is asking me what is lyrics and so on. When once a time I was with Can, I was trying to make lyric. If I really make lyric, then already some kind of reason is also inside, so it’s not really natural. For me, now I am using this kind of word, which is not Japanese or French. It’s really English or whatever. I like to make space of interactive. If people are listening and you are listening different, meaning from this, like in old stories. I like just kind of platform so everybody is involved in this. If you have special lyrics, then people listen too much for singers. If there is another people on the stage playing a guitar or keyboard or something like that, if you have texture people are always concentrating to listen to the lyrics. This I really don’t like because I never thought singer is front man. I’m not kind of this. Instead, people is having own stories. It’s for good things. After the concert, “Damo, you were singing like this.” “Did I? I cannot remember.” They understand like this. It’s really good. Another people is saying another story. I’m giving maybe people some creative moment, not just only as a listener. I really don’t like to have a listener and the sound carriers on the stage. Gap. I really don’t like, because music you can make it and there is a space for the occasional [and] random. We come together and we have a special moment. Somebody is one meter outside the house, they have a different life and different world. We can make something here. This is your truth, and this is your source of your energy and creativity. Audience Member Hello. Thank you for your words. I really appreciated you bringing up aspects of spirituality and researching things. I just wanted to know how important do you think it is, especially for younger people, to do more research into their own religious practices and how that can translate into your own definitions of spirituality? Damo Suzuki Practice is also quite important, but mainly people is thinking about how you can praise as quick as a possible or something like this, which is not that much important. Life itself is not so competition against any people, so you must do things against yourself. Otherwise you cannot develop anything. I really don’t like to compare anything. If somebody is asking me, “Which concert do you find good?”, I don’t say anything because every time situation is total different. People is also different. Audience is different. Weather is also different. Also my condition is also different. Why I can compare with this? I cannot. As a practice and thing, it’s good to hear another people, what they are trying, because it’s a social moment if you are making music together. I never perform alone, because I cannot, because music is communication. At least I need another person. I perform sometimes with a pianist or guitarist. I do things like this because I like this moment. We are creating something at the moment. There is two different people. There is three different opinions, but maybe much more. That is quite interesting to do, not only my stuff, not only his stuff. Somewhere in between and creating together. Then we can get another circumstance together. Creativity is really unlimited. You can go many many miles. That’s really good. You never get the answer, but still you’re throwing this. You shouldn’t think you get answer. Answer is not so much important because practicing and this moment, processing is most important things, which you carry living energy. This is the most beautiful moment you can get. Just creative moment. Not practice. Practice is almost connecting together with somebody’s brain like this. If you hear people like Hendrix, then you suddenly get playing like Hendrix. It’s not you. If you make something and so on. For me it is not so much important some people is playing with skill or something. Good, how it’s called, example. Once I performed a concert somewhere in England. They sent me information. There is two drummers. Two drummers, but I saw only one kit. Where’s the other drummer? One guy says, here is another. Where is the drum kit? I can only see one kit. He said, “I make a beat together with drum case.” It was fantastic. Everything you can use as a music instrument. Also, it’s not something with music, but idea quite good. I had interview together with 15 or 16-year-old schoolboy for his school newspaper. His answer was not talking. He was showing some of his paintings and [saying], “What do you think about this and this?” All ten were different paintings and photos. Some very famous photos and something like this. I must make with my creative brain to answer something. Like this kind of stuff is good because it’s really interactive. I cannot prepare to get answer. I really like always somebody trying to kill me, Giving me some adventure. It’s really fun. Practice is not so much important. Just do yourself and find your things. Keep on going with this one. It’s one of the best things you can get and easiest way. Not only for especially lazy person like me. You can make it. Anupa Mistry Any more questions? OK. Audience Member Hello. Thank you. I want to know again what the name of the last song you played? Anupa Mistry You want me to say it? Damo Suzuki “Wildschweinbraten.” Audience Member What were you thinking? I feel so much extreme happiness? What were you thinking when you were playing? Damo Suzuki No, I don’t have any particular texture. I don’t have it, because I don’t like to think. If you have a lyric already there, there is kind of reason is already developed. I really don’t like this form. I really like to have all things really free. There is no textures. I have message. Message is behind the music. What is music? Message, I told you already my philosophy and things like this. This is the message. Other things are not so important because you are changing. If you are called, you get another address. If you are getting one, another address. Things like this. Time to time totally different. I just don’t like against natural flow. Anupa Mistry Maybe the real question is what did it make you think listening to that piece of music? Damo Suzuki Yes. Anupa Mistry What did you think? Audience Member I don’t know I just felt very, very happy. Damo Suzuki That’s really nice. Me too. Audience Member Thank you. Damo Suzuki Thank you. Audience Member Hi. I’m not a participant. Anupa Mistry That’s okay. Audience Member Thank you, Damo, for coming. Love you very much. I have a lot of questions, so I have to try and think of just one. I really appreciate artists who have a strong philosophy in life, and I feel like that’s actually more important than the form of the art. That they can carry around and spread that ideology. It’s kind of hard to figure out how to pose this question. One, I really think you have an amazing sense of melody when you’re singing and cadence. I wonder for you when you’re performing, if when you get into the flow state of performing and with other people and playing off of their energy, if there’s also a point in you, like a conduit where you feel you’re taking divine information and it’s coming through you and that’s part of your philosophy in sharing musically, like why you’re on stage? Damo Suzuki It’s time to time different. It’s sometimes caused by which kind of music supporting band is playing, too. If supporting band is playing loud music, I don’t begin with loud music. It depends. Also some vicarious playing together with me, how they play. It’s total different too. That’s my philosophy for any kind of situation or something. It’s really good because at the moment I’m doing this. Let’s say it’s going to happen and things like this. If you go to football match, if you know the result already, it’s quite boring to see it. This is same like music too, my music. You don’t have any result, so you are going together. You are traveling together. You are in a trance. We are going together somewhere else with this kind of stuff. This is how instant composing work like this. This is the purpose of me to make music because I, myself, don’t know also result. Audience doesn’t know also result. We find it together, result. Togetherness. This is a real, pure, naked communication. I really like this kind of platform. That’s the best metaphor things like this. Maybe I get out of point. I don’t know. Anupa Mistry OK. All right. If there’s no more questions, then... There is a question. OK. Thank you very much, Mr. Suzuki, for being here.
(video: clip from Neverending documentary)
(music: Damo Suzuki & Killer-Bong – “Live at Chikyuya” / applause)
[applause]
[applause]
[applause]
[applause]
[applause]
[appplause]

---

Title: Amadou & Mariam
Date: 2018-11-20
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/amadou-mariam/

Amadou & Mariam
Guitarist/vocalist Amadou Bagayoko and vocalist Mariam Doumbia met at Mali’s Institute for Young Blind People, where they were both students and teachers. Today, the married couple and musical partners better known as Amadou & Mariam are the faces of contemporary West African music, combining traditional Malian music with everything from Cuban song and brass-driven funk to reggae and Delta blues. When the duo began in 1980, however, they had to travel hundreds of miles to Abidjan in Cote D’Ivoire, which until recently was one of the cultural and economic centers of Francophone West Africa, to make cassettes and perform. Within the next decade, they were playing in Europe and winding up on compilations from Western music labels. With eight studio albums, including several on US labels like Nonesuch, and collaborations with famed international artists like Manu Chao and Somali rapper K’Naan, Amadou & Mariam continue to celebrate and expand the limits of Malian music in concerts around the world.
In their lecture at RBMA Berlin 2018, Amadou & Mariam discussed the import of Mali’s Institute for Young Blind People, their songwriting process, touring the world and their musical mission.
Hosted by Frosty I’m Frosty. Welcome to Red Bull Music Academy in Berlin. Today is a beautiful high vibration day. We’re welcoming a golden couple from Bamako, Mali. We have Amadou and Mariam here.
They’ve been making music together since the early 1980s. They brought their music around the world and today they’re bringing their music here to share with you. So, let’s all welcome Amadou and Mariam. [applause] So, yours is a story of music but also of love. I’d like to ask when you first met each other. Do you have a recollection of the first time when you connected and what your thoughts were? Amadou Yes, I’d say we met in 1975 at the Institute for the Young Blind in Mali, in Bamako. I remember that I played in different bands. I went to the Institute, where Mariam was introduced to me. She sang, and I played the guitar. This is how we started to do things together. Frosty Mariam, do you remember Amadou? Do you remember, when you met him, what your thoughts were? Mariam Yes, when I was at the Institute for the Young Blind, Amadou came to find me there. I composed the songs. In 1975, Amadou came to find me there, we shook hands and he was introduced to me as a singer and a guitar player. Before we met, I heard Amadou in a piece on the radio in Mali. I really liked that song. So, when he was introduced to me, I really enjoyed that. We shook hands and we made music together. Amadou Yes, we started together. Her voice was beautiful, and I was already a professional musician. I played in different bands before coming to the Institute. She sang well; the Institute asked me to play the guitar, and she had a beautiful voice which captured me. We performed together in 1976, in January 1976. Mariam Exactly. Frosty I’ve heard that you finish each other’s sentences, and we now understand. This has built over time. It only comes from a couple that has been as long together as you have. It’s wonderful to see. Mariam Yes, it is a long time that we have been together, since 1975. I was a student at the Institute for the Young Blind when we met. I started singing when I was six. I was asked by neighbors to sing at marriages, baptisms, etc. When he came and put a band together I was the main singer. It’s been a long time that we are together. We married in 1980, we have children, and that’s it. [laughs] Frosty Can you tell us a little bit more about the Institute for the Young Blind,
how you found that place or how the place found you and what it meant to you? Amadou The Institute for the Young Blind was founded in 1973. Young blind people did not have access to education, to culture; it was a vacuum. So, the Institute was founded and Mariam was among the first to graduate. It was very important, and I went there because earlier I went into rehabilitation. We set up the music department, and this was very interesting for people in Mali. There was a lot of sympathy for the blind. We organized evenings to show how blind people can read, write and calculate – we showed that kind of thing. We also organized solidarity weeks, with bands from the Institute playing music, dancing, that attracted many people. We also started composing pieces in order to raise awareness for the problems of handicapped persons and to explain that it was necessary to help us and to support our actions, to help blind people to advance. Frosty That’s a very important place and a very powerful impact that it seems to have had. Amadou Yes, it had an effect on us, because we have created things. Mariam had a beautiful voice, and I was a musician. I sang as well, so it was a platform for us to meet and create our music. Our style of music started at the Institute, and the Institute has benefited from us as well. Frosty We’re in a room of music, with a lot of musicians. So, I think it would be nice to actually give them some music. So, I’d like to play a piece right now. We’ll talk about it afterwards. Here’s a little music. (music: Idrissa Soumaoro & L'eclipse – “Fama Allah” / applause) Frosty That’s a piece called “Fama Allah” from a band called L’Eclipse. And tell me about Idrissa Soumaoro, please. Mariam Idrissa was a teacher at the Institute of the Young Blind. He and Amadou taught us how to sing. At the time I was also composing. I taught the others how to sing and to dance. Amadou Idrissa Soumaoro and I were together since the band Les Ambassadeurs. I was at the guitar and Idrissa was on the piano. We played together. Each time we meet we play. When I went to the Institute, he fancied coming, too. He was already a teacher of music. So, he went to the Institute of the Young Blind to teach. This was our first record made by Germans at the Institute. Thank you to Germany for this, thank you. Frosty And this was kind of a private issue record, and it was released through the German government who helped fund it, but also the Mali Association for the Blind and it was given out. This seems to be a projection of the power and talent of the students who were there. Hearing the music, if you didn’t say this is connected to the Institute for the Young Blind, you wouldn’t know they were blind musicians. Sound transcends all of that. Amadou Yes, as Mariam said, there was the band of the Institute. The music of the Institute was well-known in Mali, which is why the German government helped us. This style of music comes from our youth when we listened to Pink Floyd a lot, Led Zeppelin and others. So, we tried to find a link between Floyd and our music in order to create this style. Frosty Well, what you created sounds incredible, and we are happy that you did that. Mariam, was that your first record that you appeared on, and how did it sound to hear your voice back on the record? Amadou Yes, well it was good. Mariam We listened to it at the Institute for the Young Blind. Amadou It was great to listen to our own voices. Mariam Yes. Amadou We enjoyed it. It was a great performance, because L’Eclipse consisted of blind and seeing people. We complemented each other on the heart level. I played solo guitar. Mariam I was the lead singer. Amadou Idrissa Soumaoro was on the keyboard. Mariam There was also Issa Gnaré... Amadou ...on bass. He was with us in Les Ambassadeurs. There was also Batabo Belio who played drums. There was also a young blind musician called Zouana, on bongos. It was very good, this mix of blind and seeing people. Frosty Idrissa Soumaoro who was leading this band, a long-time teacher at the Institute and a long-time friend and collaborator of yours, is not blind, but has connected to the Institute and seems to have been a very important part of the musical program there. But as you mentioned, you mentioned Les Ambassadeurs, this piece “Fama Allah” is from 1978, but you were already playing with Les Ambassadeurs 1975 to 1977. Can you introduce the group Les Ambassadeurs? Amadou Les Ambassadeurs, as its name suggests, were musicians who came from all over the place. They came from Côte d’Ivoire, Senegal, Mali, Ghana; hence the name Les Ambassadeurs. We had many different music styles. There was a singer who sang only rhythm and blues and pop, there was also a salsa singer, there was a singer from Mali also, Salif Keita who sang the traditional repertoire. Idrissa Soumaoro sang Bambara songs, and there was Ousmane Dia who sang Cuban and Senegalean music. Les Ambassadeurs was a cosmopolitan band: We played every night, from 10 PM to 3 AM. We played mostly an international repertoire: Jazz, blues, Afro-Cuban. We interpreted, and every one played his part. Customers came and requested pieces, and we played them. Frosty The full name of the group in many forms is Les Ambassadeurs du Motel de Bamako. Can you explain the motel part and where you were playing? What kind of setting were you playing in? Amadou The government had created Mali’s hotel society with the Grand Hotel. There was the motel. The motel was where we played nearly every day. It was a popular place, but not everyone went there. It was for those who knew music and who had the means, because it was a luxury hotel. This was the motel, and we played... we were a little bit like civil servants. We played and were paid at the end of the month. We practiced there, and sometimes we also traveled. Les Ambassadeurs went to France for the first time, that was in 1974. Les Ambassadeurs was a professional band, they knew how to read music and knew musical theory. Frosty You mentioned that it was very cosmopolitan, both within representing different areas of Africa and West Africa, but also Bamako was bringing in the music of the world. There are a lot of different sounds floating through the air there. Can you paint a picture of the sonic kind of field, what it sounded like in Bamako in the ’70s? What were you hearing and what were the influences? Tell us a little bit about the atmosphere in Bamako. Amadou In the ’70s, music was popular, because there were bands in every neighborhood. At the center were Les Ambassadeurs and Rail Band du Buffet de l’Hôtel de la Gare. These were the two great bands. Otherwise there was L’Orchestre National B, L’Orchestre National A. So, it was Rail Band and Les Ambassadeurs who organized afternoon concerts in cinemas in the ’70s. Young people came, it was a new way of enjoying concerts. Les Ambassadeurs had a lot of fans, and Rail Band also. They were a popular band, while Les Ambassadeurs were professional. Les Ambassadeurs played many different musical genres: African music, from Zaïre and Congo, music sung by James Brown. James Brown had a lot of influence on Mali and Africa. The two bands were a little like soccer teams, Rail Band against Les Ambassadeurs and vice versa. It was a great party, with fans from both sides. It was great. We enjoyed it. Frosty I heard you giggled a little bit. So Rail Band, those were the rivals of Les Ambassadeurs? You mentioned soccer teams, these were two rivals. In fact, if it was a soccer team, Les Ambassadeurs seduced the star player of Rail Band, Salif Keita. [He] came from Rail Band to Les Ambassadeurs. Tell us a little bit about the relationship between the two bands a little more, and also about Salif Keita. Amadou Salif Keita was in the Rail Band. As I said, at the time Les Ambassadeurs were strongly supported by the government at the time, and the motel also. It was not easy. People worked under good conditions, which is why Salif Keita was taken away. Then there was a lot of change. Salif at the time was the best traditional singer, which is why he had to join Les Ambassadeurs. The Rail Band and Les Ambassadeurs, yes there was rivalry, but that was only on stage.
We played with the musicians of the Rail Band, and they also played with those of the motel, but it was mostly for the audience that there was a rivalry. “I like a lot the Rail Band,” and, “I like Les Ambassadeurs.” It was mostly that. Frosty So, the 1970s. Around the world there was some funky music in the air. And you were talking about the rivalry on stage. Was there a stage show, was the band dancing? I know, Mariam, you were a dancer as well. And I saw you dancing to that last song, so I know this in person as well. But what was the stage show like? And was it a rivalry of the entire production, or was it focused on the music? Mariam I started on stage around ’76, with Amadou the 20th of January 1976. Before that I went to the Institute of the Young Blind, I sang and I danced. When I went there I was asked to teach singing and dancing. I took the hands of the blind to make movements, to make them dance.
When I danced the neighbors gave me gifts, all the time. They encouraged me a lot. Amadou You can also talk about the time with Les Ambassadeurs and the Rail Band. You went to concerts. Mariam Yes, we went to listen to them all the time. I went to listen to the Rail Band and also to Les Ambassadeurs at the motel and at the Buffet de la Gare. Amadou It was like soccer teams, because with Les Ambassadeurs there was a team, like the soccer team Djoliba. Les Ambassadeurs were fans of Djoliba, because their president financed Les Ambassadeurs a lot. The Rail Band was like a club of another soccer team, Stade Malien. Stade and Joliba were always against each other, and that was also true for the fans of the bands as well.
The Rail Band was very popular because they had a lot of Bambara in their repertoire. And Les Ambassadeurs were very professional, and that was the difference. Frosty Passions can run very high in both music and sports. So, this is a convergence of these energies, I imagine. Amadou Yes, this is the link. This is how we survived at the time. In the ’70s music changed a lot in Mali, particularly with concerts happening everywhere. Before, there were no concerts. We played a lot at dances. Concerts started with Les Ambassadeurs and the Rail Band. Frosty Mariam, were you going to these concerts, were you attending some of these early Les Ambassadeurs concerts as a guest? Mariam Amadou sang there, and I loved music since early childhood. I went to see Rail Band, and after we had met I went to see Les Ambassadeurs. I was at the motel all the time, and often at the Buffet de la Gare. I danced with all these groups, with my friends, we just loved both bands. Frosty Wonderful. I want to play a little touch of Les Ambassadeurs. And this is not a live performance, but this is a radio broadcast from Mali. And I think it’ll illustrate some of the wide world influences that were in the air. Here’s Les Ambassadeurs. (music: Les Ambassadeurs – Radio Mali broadcast / applause) Frosty So, this is a Radio Mali broadcast. Number one. This is mid ’70s in Bamako. But you could easily think you’re maybe in Havana. There’s sounds of Cuba, Puerto Rico, Haiti, and wider world sounds floating through the air of Bamako. Were you picking on all of this through the radio, through records? How is all of this music influence floating into your lives in Bamako? Amadou As I said, Les Ambassadeurs was a band with a lot of variety. We had many records from Cuba. We tried to copy the guitarist and the other instruments. The singer was Ousmane Dia, who came from Senegal to Mali... Mariam ...with a beautiful voice. Amadou Yes, there were many musical genres that we interpreted from Brazil. It was great because at the motel there were people from all over the world. They stayed there, and since we were in the night club and played there, we had people asking us to play pieces. There were also other musicians, Jimmy Cliff who came to Mali, playing with Les Ambassadeurs and the Rail Band. Many musicians came and we knew their repertoire, particularly Fela Kuti from Nigeria. The Rail Band was specialized in Afrobeat because they had a good connection. Les Ambassadeurs went to the Arts Festival in Lagos in 1976, with all African countries, it was a great festival. Frosty When Les Ambassadeurs were digging into possibilities of songs to play, were you exchanging things that you had heard on a record or on the radio? And were you frequently changing the songs that you were playing live? Amadou The songs in the evenings were liked very much by the audience: Music from Congo. Well, we had to learn a lot. Les Ambassadeurs was like a school. We tried to play all kinds of music. That was how all the musicians in Les Ambassadeurs were formed. After Les Ambassadeurs, people could play almost anywhere, because we played all kinds of music, even music for popular dances, tango, all this. With Les Ambassadeurs, it was mostly like being in a music school. Frosty You guys had chops. I don’t know if the translators got “chops.” You guys were on fire, from the sound of it. I want to play a touch of something that maybe was floating in Mariam’s ears. I’m just gonna play a little bit of this. But this is kind of what I’ve heard [about where Mariam’s] head was at this point. (music: Sheila – “Bang Bang” / applause) Frosty So that’s Sheila with “Bang Bang.” Mariam Sheila, yes. Frosty So, at one point I heard you were also called Sheila. Mariam Yes, when I was a little girl my girlfriends called me Sheila. I sang one of her songs. In Mali, there were nicknames for trendy people. My nickname was Sheila. Even now my old girlfriends call me Sheila. I sang her songs. During the holidays, I sang this. We had created a group called Les Noblesses. I was the leader. I arranged and organized everything. Amadou Mariam was fond of French music, she forgot to say. You can tell them what you listened to. Go on. Mariam I listened a lot to French music. Amadou Sheila, Nana Mouskouri... Mariam ...Mireille Mathieu, Dalida. Amadou This music was played on the radio. Mariam Nicoletta, Sylvie Vartan, Johnny Hallyday, a lot. Frosty So, you were hearing this music on the radio, and were you also early on singing in the style? But also – were you encouraged to be a musician? Did your family, your community, support you? Before finding the Institute for the Young Blind, did you feel you could be a musician professionally? Mariam Yes, a lot. My family has supported me a lot. They have encouraged me, people have encouraged me for this music. I sang it and people liked it. Frosty Your voice is magical, so I’m sure anything you sing people would like. Mariam People really liked it. Frosty So, at some point Bamako might have started feeling a little small, and you moved to Côte d’Ivoire, and this is after you married. Could you tell us what brought you to Côte d’Ivoire and – you were living in Abidjan – what Abidjan was providing that Bamako wasn’t? Mariam When we went to Côte d’Ivoire, at the time there were no recording studios, there were no producers and no distributors yet. We had many concerts everywhere, people encouraged us a lot, but we went to Côte d’Ivoire to find studios. At the time everyone went there, all the trendy people. We also, we were in Mali, Burkina, and so we went to Côte d’Ivoire for recording. There we made our record. The first cassette went well, the second as well, up to the fourth. Then we came back to Mali. We had concerts in Côte d’Ivoire, with full houses everywhere. But at our first concert there we were little known, and there were only two people. This didn’t discourage us. We stayed and made our cassette, which went well. Then people said we should go to France because people would love our music. We went for the first time to France around 1994, in African neighborhoods. Then we returned to Mali, and a French producer came to find us there. We got to know each other, and then we went to France.
The first time on stage in France went very well. We were stressed, particularly me. Amadou has no stress. When we played at the Transmusic Hall in Rennes, people enjoyed it. This is how it went. Amadou We had to go to Côte d’Ivoire because in Mali there were no studios, there was only the radio station. There were no producers, there were no newspapers, either. There wasn’t even TV in Mali.
So, all those who became famous went to Côte d’Ivoire. This is where we found our first producer called Maikano. And when we sang we became famous in Côte d’Ivoire. We had many interviews in newspapers, which is why we became known in Africa. This way we came to Europe. Marc-Antoine Moreau heard our music and came to find us. So, we were in France. We talked about music. We said we wanted our music to be international. This is how we started to come over. Our international career started in 1997. We played at the Trans Musicales in Rennes, but we had no record on the market. We were a little worried. We said, “We are playing in France. No one knows us. How are we going to deal with this?” But it was the contrary. When we started to sing people sang with us, they applauded. We were very surprised. And thanks to this concert we got our first record company, Polygram, who contracted us there. We returned to the same festival in ‘98, we played well. And our first international tour started here in Germany in December ‘98. We were welcomed in France and we were in Germany as well. We often came to Germany, for the World Cup of 2006, with Herbert Grönemeyer. We toured about 20 cities. Each time people ask us which country we prefer we say we like France, Canada and Germany, because Germans support us and like our music. Every time we come many journalists ask us a lot of questions. We were in Stuttgart, in Chemnitz, in Berlin, Nürnberg, Hamburg, quite a lot. We know Germany quite well from our concert tours. Frosty How did it feel to be a young couple, both a romantic married couple, but also a music couple, who was recording and then having your music embraced by the world? How did it feel to you in those early stages, coming from Bamako and reaching the world? Mariam Now we feel very well, because we have toured the world, we have played in front of many presidents, many personalities. We have met also many celebrities, Barack Obama, Jacques Chirac, Hollande, many people. Now we feel very good. Amadou People ask us what we think about our current success, and we say that it has exceeded our dreams. Our dream was to come to France. But we didn’t think at all that we would go anywhere in the world. This has surprised us a lot. But it is also because we stayed a long time in Mali, we worked hard, we listened to a lot of music. When we came, connection came fast. We played with many bands. We had a lot of sympathy with groups like U2, Coldplay and many musicians on our albums, Manu Chao and others who have seen the value of our music and have embraced it. And as I said, with our background in Les Ambassadeurs, we were able to play anywhere in the world. Frosty You’re coming from a specific space. You seem to have no boundaries when it comes to viewing the world of sound. You’re synthesising that big world view through your music. You hear all these shades of music from around the world, which is wonderful. Amadou Yes, in order to know something, you have to love everything. We listened to everything. Blues, rock, jazz, disco, everything – Cuban music, salsa. Our style mainly comes from blues and rock. We can mix styles, and so we play at nearly every festival – jazz, blues, rock, pop music, world music. We’re nearly everywhere in the world because we love all types of music. This is why we have this advantage. There are some who are good at certain music styles only; we are not like this. We sing in French, but not like French singers. We sing with our style in French. We mix in Bambara, this is very good. We do not sing like the French, but we sing in French. Frosty You’ve played in some of the biggest arenas in the world with some of the biggest bands in the world, like U2, Coldplay, etc... the World Cup opening. But we’re here in the Funkhaus in Berlin, and the moment is now. Would you like to play a little music for us live in the place? We’d love to hear a little bit of guitar, a little bit of your beautiful voices, share some music live. Would that be something you would be interested in? Amadou Yes, we will try something, because it would be a pity to come without playing.
I think we can play something now, yes. Frosty I’d love you to also tell about your guitar... let’s have some applause first. [applause] Amadou [holding his guitar] This is the first piece that we performed with Mariam, and I will play a piece that was my first piece as well. The first piece together is “Teree La Sebin.” (music: Amadou & Mariam – “Teree La Sebin” (live) / applause) Amadou Merci. Thank you. Mariam Danke schön. I sang this as a little girl. That day there were many celebrities, high-standing people, many people. I was successful. There were many people throwing money at me.
Since that day I have always had courage. Merci, dankeschön. [applause] Amadou This is from the Mali era. It is the most famous piece over here, “Je Pense A Toi.” We will sing it together. (music: Amadou & Mariam – “Je Pense A Toi” (live) / applause) Mariam Yeah, danke schön, thank you, merci. The first piece is called “Teree La Sebin.” This was a song to increase awareness for problems of the blind. Amadou In the song we say that to be blind is natural, it is a handicap, no one has looked to have this illness. It was to increase awareness of the parents to not blame and not marginalize their children. But to look after them. I was not the first to be blind, but many before me. It is not a problem, but destiny. Everyone gets a chance in their lives. There are people who are normal, there are others who are handicapped. Life is like this, so you have to use the means you have. This is what the first piece “Teree La Sebin” is about. The second piece is “Je Pense A Toi.” It is a love song. It made us famous in France and with it we started our international career. To explain “Je Pense A Toi” – not everyone speaks French: “I think of you, my love, my sweetheart, do not leave me, my love, my darling. When I’m in bed I only dream of you, and when I wake up I only think of you. When I do not see you, I cannot say anything, I cannot do anything, I do not want to see anything, my love, my sweetheart.” This is what we sang, in a longer version: “Some promised you the earth, others heaven, some promised you the moon, but I have nothing other than my poor guitar.” This is simply a love song. Frosty It was a very tender sight to see you both there, singing this love song together that you have created and being so close to each other, very beautiful. How does the song writing happen? As a couple, what is your creative flow as a couple and musicians? Mariam For the lyrics, we do it each for ourselves. I compose my songs during the night. Then I ask Amadou and we arrange together. For him, it is early in the morning. For me, it is during the night because there is no one disturbing me. It happens that we compose together. When I ask Amadou, very often he says, “Mariam, take this out, put this in.” Often when he composes his songs I tell him, “Amadou, take this out, put this in.” This is how we do it. We arrange together, but at the beginning we are each on our own. Amadou Inspiration often comes to me early in the morning; people are not up, there is less noise. This is good for writing lyrics. Also, during our trips there is a lot of inspiration. Everyone for himself, and then we come together to work it out. Frosty Mariam, you mentioned that you like to write at night. Why do you like to write at night? Mariam I like to write at night because there is no noise at night, no one disturbs me. When I’m in my room, I compose a lot during the night. Amadou just said we also do it on our travels, that’s where I compose as well. At night it is calm. Frosty Where are you pulling some of your inspiration for the lyrics, obviously your own experience? But are you reading a lot of poetry books, looking at the news, keeping open to the world? I know the radio’s on a lot. Mariam Yes, we listen a lot to the radio. Inspiration comes from daily life, this is what we generally sing about. Amadou We are inspired by daily life, by the society in which we live. We try to take the good things, we describe the bad things, we sing about mutual love, because it is very important. We need love in life, we need peace, we also need freedom. Justice as well. We create some of our texts, we also witness things happening, we try to put them into a song. This is how it works now. When we sing, we sing about what we have experienced and how we would like society to be. Our style is blues and rock, and Bambara music is linked to those. We listened a lot... Me on the guitar, I listened a lot to Jimi Hendrix, Eric Clapton, many guitarists. With the traditional instrument Ngoni, we try to mix tradition and modernity, and this is what mostly makes our music. Frosty The blues and Mali are very linked, and many people say that the roots of the blues are really in Mali. And there are instruments in West Africa that are connected to the American banjo, and the transition of instruments and ideas and people. Do you feel those roots when you are in Mali? Do you feel that there is not a gap of an ocean and a continent, but that those are one and the same? Amadou Yes, American blues and Mali blues are both blues. There are links, but there is a difference. For example, the Americans have developed their music a lot; they can do 12 beat, 16 and others. In Mali, people have stayed in the tradition. What comes to heart, we sing it in our music. The difference between American and Mali blues is mostly based on the beat. Frosty Now that you’ve achieved worldwide success, you spend a lot of time, you have a home in Paris. When you’re in Paris and you’re writing music, are you thinking of Mali a lot, and what is the essence of Mali in your life and of Mali that might inspire you creatively during your time in Paris? Mariam We often think of Mali, because it is our home country. So, we think of Mali when we are in Paris. We write songs also for Malian people, for everyone. Amadou When we are in France we are connected to Malian people; they come to visit. We go to Mali. So, we are not at all disconnected, we always think of Mali. We also think of Europe. The European influence comes mainly from playing with professionals and to blend this in our music we are creating. These are the two sides we have. In all our albums we speak a lot about Mali, about things happening there. Frosty This is a question for the people in the room. By show of hands, who has been to Mali? So we’re actually fortunate to be in this space. It’s an opportunity for us to travel through music. But also – I’m curious – it looks as if nobody in the room has been to Mali yet. Can you tell us a little something about the spirit of Mali that people outside of Mali might not know that is most powerful to you? Amadou For those who do not know Mali – it is a welcoming place. They like people coming from abroad. There is hospitality. Even if you do not know anyone, you will always find somewhere to stay or to have company. People will try to show you many things. Mali is also known for its musical variety, because each race has its music. The Bambara have their music. The Songhai have their music. The Mandé people also have their music. When women run the household... Mariam ...we sing. Amadou There is music for hunters, for farmers. Mali is a country that likes people to come and to learn, to take everything as it is. We like blending, we like learning and traveling as well. People from Mali travel a lot. Mali is great, on this cultural level. For music, Mali is a good country. And for hospitality. Yes there are troubles now, but before, Mali was a peaceful country. We always try to talk about things happening in Mali. In Dimanche À Bamako, a day of marriage, when people go to the town hall and then they have a procession, there is open air music. It is a party everywhere on Sundays. Everyone is dressed up, everyone is celebrating – it’s great on Sundays. Frosty You both mentioned that you seek a little bit of evening silence and solitude when you’re being creative. But when you’re relaxing in Bamako in your home, and you head out on the streets – what does it sound like? Is there music from every corner? What is the sonic texture of the city? Amadou There is music almost everywhere. Mariam Yes, in Mali there is music in every street. What he just said: On Sundays people dress up, we celebrate, we play, we dance, we eat well. Amadou Maybe not now. Before, Mali was a good country. In Mali, they really like foreigners. There is music at the markets, in the houses, young people gather in front of the doors to make tea. There are maybe 10 or 15 people. They listen to music everywhere. They like music. For a long time there was no music industry in Mali. So, we listened to music coming from somewhere else, which is why we have listened to many people. People from Mali enjoy music, and they have no borders for music. Frosty You said people dress very nicely on Sunday, but you dress very nicely on Tuesdays as well. You’ve brought us into your world of... Amadou Yes, because the visual aspect goes with music also. What we convey also needs appearance. In Mali the singers, the big artists like to dress well, they like to wear a lot of gold. This is part of musical culture. We like to be in sync with what we feel. We sing Bambara music, and we have clothes associated with this. Frosty So, we feel we know a little bit about Mali now, we’ve been brought into your world. But one specific thing about you as a couple is maybe sharing being blind. And it is something that happened when you were both young. But you also bring people into this world a bit. You’ve had concerts called “Eclipse” concerts, and these concerts are in the dark. And so people are focusing on the environment, the atmosphere and the music. I’d like to actually now bring people into that world a bit. We’re gonna do something a little unconventional in the hall here.
And we’re gonna turn off all the lights of the hall. And I‘d like everybody to additionally close your eyes, too, because... Let’s get into the world of sound, and let’s get into the world of sound that Amadou and Mariam have created. Because it’s powerful. And I think when we get here it’s even more powerful. So, I’ll wait until the lights go all the way down, and I’m gonna press play on this piece. I’ll announce what it is afterwards, but let’s listen for a bit. (music: Amadou & Mariam – “La Fête au Village” / applause) Frosty That’s a piece called “La Fête Au Village” from Dimanche A Bamako. It looks like Amadou is about to say something. Amadou Yes, it’s “La Fête Au Village.” In the villages each year it is like here on the festival evenings. Each year after harvesting, young people organize events, mostly in the villages. People dress up, they come on bicycles and motorcycles, on lorries to the party at the village.
It is mostly after harvesting, after having sold the rice and millet. This is when you celebrate. Frosty It’s nice to celebrate through music and through music at these concerts, Eclipse. And also through the songs. The content and lyrics of many of your songs, you’re raising awareness of blindness and being a blind artist, and people who don’t have a platform, to pull people up. You help them elevate. But you’re also raising our awareness as listeners, and our awareness to sound, the power of sound itself. I’m curious about... I’m not blind. It’s hard to fully place myself, you know, in that position. But both of you had vision during your lives, early on. Is there a part of the visual memory that stays with you as humans and as musicians or has it become something else? You mentioned, Amadou, at one point in the interview that we’ve already forgotten your blindness, and it seems that you’ve transcended that. Can you talk a little bit about the memories, and if it’s connected? Amadou There are two phases in life. When you are blind you have to be able to say that you are blind and accept it. The second thing is to know what to do. You have to try and see what you can do, because in life everyone tries to do something. You try to do what you can do and not just sit around. When I could see, I saw the sun, the moon, I played with a ball, I played everywhere, I went on a bicycle. Up to the age of 16, I could see. Afterwards things deteriorated. But I increased my courage with my other senses. You have to develop the ears, the nose, sense of touch and sense of space. In listening to music you can imagine; also in playing the guitar. When I am in a car, this helps particularly in areas I know well. For instance, we were in Montreux, we took a taxi and I gave the exact instructions to the driver. He stopped and asked me whether I really did not see. I have a sense for space. When we travel, people show us our hotel room and that’s it. We get around, we know the space around us, we find where everything is. This is very important: You have to remember where you were, you have to know how to get around and find things. Very often I can tell seeing people how to find places. Of course people ask me whether I would like to see again, and I say I don’t need it because I can do everything other people do, using a phone, sending emails. I travel a lot, I’m always on a plane. We play at all festivals around the world. I am the president of the Malian artists federation, I am the president of the professional musicians’ trade union in Mali, we are ambassadors for the World Food Program. What more would you want? Life is like this. Frosty You’ve traveled the world and you’ve done so much. I’d like to talk about something inside as well. There is this idea of synaesthesia – I don’t know how it will translate – the visual accompaniment to music. But that doesn’t mean visual with eyes open, seeing eyes open – it can be inside and that can be something vivid. You mention imagination. How in your world, in your minds, hearing a guitar tone or something – do you have this vivid imagination that is inside, an inner vision? Amadou Yes, when I hear a guitar, when I hear music, I give it a color. With guitars often it is white, with other sounds it is yellow and red also. Within we imagine many things, which is why in music we can imagine melancholy, the sounds at a beach, the forest. This comes to mind when listening to music. Some music sends you to the countryside, other music into the city. In your mind you imagine a vibrant city with cars. In the countryside, you see green because you have seen it. When you have seen things, you can imagine them. When you haven’t it is more difficult to imagine. But we have seen, and so we can imagine things, the colors of our clothes.
What we have inside is sometimes personal, we sense the difference between voices. When someone speaks we know, we don’t need to see him. We even sense the differences in how people walk, so that we know exactly who is coming, and we imagine many things in our minds. Frosty In this world one of the things that I believe is that our differences connect us more than our similarities. That we are all more unique than we are the same. When people start to connect through differences, they actually come together. I think that collapsing of borders internationally through music, bringing sound from places and also the collapsing of preconceptions, I think these things join us, when you celebrate the differences. I appreciate the effort you put into educating people about your background, your specific experience. But we’re also different in so many ways; it’s beautiful to have that expressed. Amadou We complement each other in this world. This is what we sing in one of our pieces called “Africa.” People say that every day is similar but not the same. The fingers of one hand are not the same, but in life we complement each other. Everyone should know this. The biggest needs the smallest, the weakest needs the strongest. If we were all the same the world would not move, no one would do anything for anyone. We depend on each other and we complement each other. Handicapped people need able-bodied people, and the able-bodied need the handicapped. It is a task. Frosty Absolutely, an exchange. You’ve put an energetic exchange through music into the world, and we appreciate it so much. There’s a piece, you mentioned that maybe you wanna play a piece... I’m not sure. Do you want to play a piece or would you like me to play a recording? I also have a recording here. Amadou I don’t know, which piece? Frosty So, I have a piece here that to me, you talk about these vivid inner atmospheres, colors. Let’s hear a piece of music. This is a song that I’d like to play, called “Sabali.” And this is a song that is another piece that put you on a very big scale internationally and reached people all over the world. So, we’re gonna hear Amadou and Mariam’s song “Sabali.” This is from the album Welcome to Mali. (music: Amadou & Mariam – “Sabali” / applause) Frosty That’s “Sabali” from Amadou and Mariam, from Welcome to Mali 2008, produced by Damon Albarn and nominated for Best Contemporary World Music recording [at the Grammy awards]. I think world music as a genre can be stripped from it, your universal music, your music beyond that, and it’s really amazing. Can you tell us a little bit about that song, about the lyrical content and where that was born? Amadou The content is... Mariam ...patience. When you are patient, you can get many things. We were courageous, we were patient, which is why we received so many awards, we had many meetings, we traveled a lot. This is patience. Amadou When you travel, you have to be patient. You have to wait in airports. When you love someone, you have to be patient. It is with patience that you make love triumph. I give you a big kiss, that’s it. You have to be patient. When you are in a hurry, you cannot do all this. Frosty In my ears, patience and passion. I didn’t realize in English at least, I couldn’t hear the French, but those are similar words and things that are closer than they may seem. As a married couple, patience and passion are also pretty integral to your balance in relationship. Mariam Yes, it is very important. When you are married, when you are together sometimes there are problems but you have to manage them, you have to be patient. This way you are gonna live long. Amadou In the song – when you love someone you need a lot of patience. This kind of patience is a bit like tolerance and compromise. The three go together. When you love your man, you need a lot of tolerance and comprehension. When you love a woman, you have to try and understand her, so you need patience in order to analyze all this. Frosty This is a big one, but it can also be an easy one. What would be your definition of love? What is love to you? Amadou Love is a feeling that you have for each other, a feeling, to love each other naturally and to share the same passion for life, to connect, to understand each other. To look into the same direction, to try to share happiness, that is important in love. Mariam Communication is also very important. Frosty And I’m sure that ability to communicate as a couple also comes through in the music, translated through your working relationship, and we hear it in the output of the music. Mariam Yes, there is communication between us. Amadou In music yes, because we are always there, we play one thing, then another, we communicate – this is good, this is not good. We can put this in, we can do this. All this is based on love, because when you love someone even when he does bad things you don’t say anything or what you would like. But if the person does things you encourage her, this is loving work, loving your partner, sharing life, love in general. Frosty Would love be kind of the greatest mission in your music? Or what would you define as the greatest mission in music? Amadou We have many missions in music. Mariam Justice, love, peace, the message of peace and of love. The message of justice, the message of understanding – all of this is in our music. Amadou And giving hope to people. This is very important in everything we do. We are here, and this gives pride to those who stayed in Mali. That we move to other continents gives them hope. People thinking that blind people cannot do anything – well, just seeing us and blind people working gives them hope. Couples who do not understand each other – we tell them that we have been together since 1976, this can give them hope. Our mission is to give people hope, to make them smile, encourage people to work and to love each other more. Frosty Love, peace, but also bringing it back to your early times in Mali, the energy of great dance music and a party. I’d like to actually play – before moving to questions – this is from your newest album, this is from your album La Confusion, I can be confused even in saying that. “Bofou Safou,“ this is a piece from Amadou and Mariam. We’re gonna hear this jam because it is an upbeat dancy jam, and then we’re moving in with some questions. (music: Amadou & Mariam – “Bofou Safou” / applause) Frosty Let’s have some questions, I guess. There’s David with the magic microphone. Audience Member Hello, first of all thank you for sharing all that music and love. Being two of the leading voices of Malian music, I would like to ask, what do you think about the conflict areas over in Mali in recent years and the effect it’s had on music coming from Mali? Amadou We have sung about the conflict in Mali for years. At one time, music was forbidden in the north. People have fought in order to revitalize this music. We have sung that we want peace in our country, let us hold hands. In our latest album we have sung La Confusion. It has become confusion everywhere, no one listens to anybody, there is rivalry between men and women.
At each event we sing in order to raise awareness so that they can understand better and see that ours is a message of peace. We are aware of the situation; this is what we sing in our songs. Audience Member Hi, thanks first of all for coming and for your little concert, that was a real highlight. I wonder if, as you had to develop your auditive sense more than people who can see, if you have realized any differences in your approach to making music, also like in the process of making music, in comparison to other people. And if there is something that you could teach us that we could pay more attention to, maybe, as people who are distracted from our visual sense? Did that make sense? I hope I... Amadou When you don’t see, you concentrate a lot on the music. We hear things that seeing people normally don’t. We deepen the auditive sense, we analyze all sounds that come. There can be noises we hear, but seeing people do not pay attention to. We develop our ears. Audience Member Thank you. An is there anything that you could teach us, that you realize that you do differently in comparison to other musicians, that maybe we could benefit from? Amadou Music is something we do differently, particularly concentrating, and inspiration. As a blind person, you have to concentrate. We make music for our own pleasure and we share this with others. In making music we get out of solitude, we have a guitar at hand, we have a piano, we enjoy. You have to do something you enjoy and something to get out of isolation. When you don’t see, you listen a lot, to the radio, to music. We could take a whole day just listening to music. I think it is all about concentration. Audience Member Thanks for this beautiful lecture and especially for the music, because I don’t think I have heard something like this in my entire life. Being able to see it in front of my eyes and enjoy and being also part of the performance while we were clapping our hands was definitely beautiful, beautiful, beautiful, really. My question is regarding black music, African music. What do you think about black artists nowadays, and do you think they’re connected to the roots? Amadou There are different pictures, there are artists who stayed with their traditional music and who don’t look for anything else, there are other black artists trying to do things in order to come front stage and connect. There is Afrobeat and there is another well-known style of music, black African rap. They have understood that we can blend our African music with blues and rock. This opens up. I believe that African artists move more to the universal, which is good. Earlier it was traditional with traditional instruments because it was African. But now we are moving beyond that. We are now making universal music for everyone, without wiping out traditional music. It has its place, which is where we recognize culture and the value of artists in their ethnic or African dimension. There is traditional and there is blending. Frosty One of your sons, Sam, is in a group called SMOD. He is a hip-hop artist, and it seems that maybe now currently making music is not so different to the spirit that was in the air in Bamako in the ’70s, the blending and contemporary expression. Mariam It is not the same thing. He raps and plays the guitar. So, it is not the same as our music. He has his music. He was with SMOD, they were three, but now he is on his own. It is not the same as in the ’70s. Amadou There are many rap groups in Africa, that has changed a lot, it has become very modern. In Mali there are many groups who do things differently than we did. But he is a rapper with a universal edge. Audience Member Thank you for the great music and the great lecture. I strongly believe that there is no black or white music. Music is music, music is a universal language.
That’s my understanding of music. There is no such thing as black or white music. Thanks. Amadou Very often it is said that music is universal, whether you are white or black, we listen to music. It helps people to pass time and to... Mariam ...find relief with their problems. Amadou It brings people closer. Mariam Exactly. Amadou Music is universal. It has no color. Audience Member Once again, thank you so much. I have a question about your time in Abidjan. When you guys lived there, were you collaborating with Ivorian artists and were there specific styles of Ivorian music that inspired you? Amadou In Côte d’Ivoire we played with many other artists at the time, we had concerts together. But at the time featuring wasn’t very developed. Everyone played their music, but sometimes we played together. Mariam We shared the stage with others. Amadou With many Ivorian artists, but everyone on their own. Then there was a lot more featuring; we asked others to sing on our albums and we sang on other albums as well. Now there is this kind of cooperation. Before, there was no featuring. Audience Member Hello, I was wondering, as a couple and professionals, how do you guys balance, like professional work life while that’s also shared with family life? Mariam Yes, we work well with the family, in Bamako, in Mali. There are some who are in France as well. We feel good, we travel. We are in France for a time, then we go to Mali. There are no problems. Amadou We succeed in having a professional life and family life at the same time. It is complicated, but it works because we have always sung that we have to understand each other. Family life needs communication, work also. We can work in the family, it is easier with music. Audience Member Bonsoir, non bonjour. I am curious about you as traditional musicians who also worked with people in electronic music. We listened to some pieces with a lot of electronics. I would like to know whether – for example, you come from a background with a rhythm created by a group – [it is] difficult for you or have you embraced a rhythm that is dictated by a machine? How do you see this? Amadou As we said at the beginning, we do not exclude any music. We have been listening to electronic music for a long time, with pieces like Oxygène, we liked this music and also groups like Tangerine Dream. We had a great taste for electronic music. When we came to Europe we were able to fulfil our dreams. We liked this type of music, which is why we create fusion. We liked a lot of disco and listened to it, Donna Summer, Boney M. etc. Our mission is to blend, not only electronic music, but we have always liked it. We enjoy this element in our music. Audience Member I have a question with a well-known voice. You lost your vision when you were 16. You are a guitarist. Did you learn to play through listening or did you learn it through music theory, for blind or seeing people; how did you learn your art? Amadou I started with music without knowing music theory. I played in bands, and later I learned music theory. First of all I went to the Arts Institute, where teachers taught us music theory.
But when I went to the school for the blind I learned music theory through braille. Which is how I learnt music theory in both worlds. In braille it is all with letters, quite complicated. There are octave keys but moving up and down is not possible in braille, but there are signs indicating this. I did learn music theory without seeing, and when I went to the Institute I put this into practice. I know notation in braille, the different notes, the different keys. As I said, at Les Ambassadeurs everyone could read music, which informed me as well. I am self-educated; I read a lot, also in braille. I know both worlds. Frosty So, let’s put our hands together for Amadou and Mariam. Thank you so much. [applause]

---

Title: 1998
Date: 2019-01-01
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/1998/

Menu
About
Lectures
Alumni
Search
Daily Archive
Red Bull Music
About
Lectures
Alumni
Daily Archive
Red Bull Music
Search
1998
Jeff Mills
Academy: Berlin 1998

---

Title: Breakbeat Lou
Date: 2019-06-06
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/breakbeat-lou/

Breakbeat Lou
Growing up in New York City in the ’70s, Louis Flores came to hip-hop like so many other Latino kids his age: by rushing to contribute as it sprung up around him, first as a dancer and then as a DJ and producer. In the early ’80s, Flores teamed up with the late Leonard Roberts to put out records inspired by the early hip-hop jams. This lead to the bootleg Octopus Breakbeats, compiling the breaks DJs had been using to keep dancers moving, and then in 1986 to the Street Beat Records label. Selecting and editing foundational breaks, Flores and Roberts acquired the rights to release these under the Ultimate Breaks & Beats series. Over the next decade the UBB compilations made a seismic impact on how hip-hop was created by providing fodder and inspiration to a new generation of sample-minded producers. The compilations would also play a part in the explosion of jungle and drum & bass in the UK and find their ways into numerous chart hits from Mariah Carey to Hanson. Yet Flores and Roberts remained largely unrecognized for their contribution until decades later. Flores left the music industry in 1995, having worked as a DJ, editor and producer, before returning in the late 2000s when the importance of UBB, and his work editing the breaks, was brought back to light by fans such as Kenny Dope.
In this lecture at the Red Bull Music Academy presents Laboratorio La Havana 2019, Flores discussed his relationship with pioneers such as Scott La Rock and the DITC crew, why UBB and Street Beat Records came to be and how he navigates the ever-changing waters of hip-hop, both musically and culturally.
Transcript: Serko Fu Welcome to this new lecture. This time we have a legend, a pioneer. Someone who’s been around since the beginning. Born in the Bronx; a creator, a co-founder of one of the most important labels. And many of us unknowingly grew up listening to records, dancing and in the DJs’ case, mixing records, that were sampled from the compilations edited by my brother and his colleague. Let’s please give it up for Breakbeat Lou. [applause] Breakbeat Lou Thank you, thank you, thank you. Serko Fu Well, welcome Lou. First of all I’d like you to tell us… maybe the question I’m about to ask is too clichéd for you. However, there have been very few opportunities for someone who’s lived hip-hop’s genesis firsthand to tell us about it, and in Spanish. So I’d like you to tell us what growing up in New York in the ’70s was like? Breakbeat Lou Thank you, thank you. Well, for me it started at home with my mom. She played records, and she called it ‘Cleaning Saturdays.’ And usually at 7.30 in the morning, the first thing you heard was music from the record player. And then she started to clean. And so I began to develop an ear and a taste for music. We’ll fast forward to ’72. In ’72 there started to be what are now called graffiti writers, but back then we just called them writers. I started doing what they call tagging in ’72. It was a marvelous experience for me, because back then New York City schools didn’t have the funds to support art. So we started to put our names on what were called panel vans or on trains, or on any white wall really, to express ourselves. We’ll fast forward to ’73. In ’73 many block parties started – back then we called them jams – and there were always dance competitions. And as I remember it – I can’t talk for the whole state of New York – but I remember that it was mostly Latinos at them. In ’73 we started the dance competitions and instead of fighting, we danced. August 11 was the date [Kool] Herc started to play records in a different way. But what I’ll say is, if it wasn’t for Latin blood, hip-hop wouldn’t exist. The reason I’m saying this is because what inspired Herc to play records like that were the dancers back then who mostly danced to the record’s break. [Some popular breaks] back then were “Apache,” “Give It Up Or Turnit A Loose,” and “The Mexican.” Those are the records I remember with that rhythm. And we waited for that break to start dancing. I think that if it wasn’t for Latin dancers back then we wouldn’t be able to call our culture hip-hop culture. Serko Fu Interesting. These parties you mention with Kool Herc back then, the block parties, what were they like? Do you remember the first party you witnessed? Breakbeat Lou Back then it was mostly a tightknit community. If someone had a hard time paying rent, or getting food, we would organize a party to get the money or something. We’d ask the police department for permission to close the streets and we’d just play music; not with the type of DJ that had a turntable and a mixer, just music. And we had fun; we danced from noon until they asked us to turn it off. Back then the community was tight, we helped each other. And what Herc also did then was to found a community center, where he played that music so the young people wouldn’t get in gangs or anything like that, and they’d have fun instead, with something that wouldn’t be dangerous for them. Serko Fu Interesting, interesting. You say you started doing graffiti, then you were a b-boy. When did you start as a DJ? Breakbeat Lou Let’s see... When the boom of Herc playing that kind of music with that rhythm happened, there were two other people too, who started to make noise on their own, and those were Afrika Bambaataa and Grandmaster Flash. Everybody says that hip-hop started in the South Bronx. It actually didn’t. Kool Herc lived in the Northwest Bronx, that’s a completely different place. Flash did live in the South Bronx and Afrika Bambaataa was in the Northeast Bronx. Back then those were the three points that were really lively, and everybody wanted to go there and have fun, because it was something wonderful for us. There wasn’t any other kind of party that played that type of music, there wasn’t anyone who’d take the mic and communicate with people like that. It was something special for everyone. I couldn’t wait until the following week. It was amazing to go to those parties. A friend of mine bought a turntable in ’74, with a group called the Paradise Crew, and that’s when I started playing as a disc jockey for the first time. Back then, I don’t know if it’s the same now, but back then there was something called “paying your dues.” I would practice in a room, but I couldn’t play outside until ’78. But they’d call me, and I used to carry the crates. My job was to make sure records got to where they had to be. I was a little kid, carrying a crate with records. But I didn’t care about the particulars of what I did. Because of my love for music and for culture, I wanted to be there. To be on the other side of the ropes was a thing of pride. And I was there. With my hands all dirty and full of scratches, but it was amazing. I felt proud to be in that kind of place – on the crew side, not on the other side. Serko Fu So you paid your dues. Breakbeat Lou I paid my dues. Serko Fu Well, so... We usually see you play with two Technics and your 45s, but how did you start? Because I doubt you started with a couple of Technics. How was it? Breakbeat Lou The way I started practicing as a DJ, and my mom wanted to kill me every time she saw me, was by having a record player on one side and an 8-track tape recorder on the other side. I’d use a switch to go from the phono receiver to the 8-track tape. Without knowing at what point of the song I was, but I had the idea of playing the two records at the same time and switching from one song to another. It really touched my heart and I said, “This is what I want to do from now on.” And my first... My brother-in-law bought me my first turntable, because he saw me going to my friends’ houses to play and I’d come back with that fever, I couldn’t stop talking about music,
and he said, “I’m tired of seeing you like this, I’ll buy you your own player.” And I still have it, the Technics [SL-B101], belt-drive turntable. And I have the mixer too, a Numark DM-500 mixer, that was the first mixer with cue point and crossfaders. He bought those for me in ’81. But before that my first turntable was a Pioneer, which was a wooden piece of furniture, and then I started with the [SL-B101], which they also bought for me. But I think God had this in store for me, because I remember the first record I bought in 1973. It was a Willie Colón record called “Che Che Cole,” a 45 I have to this day. And that made me proud, to have a vinyl record in my hand and say, “This is mine,” because back then, I don’t know if it was the same in the rest of the world, but in New York the pride of having a record meant that everybody would put their name on it. “This record is mine.” To have my own record and say, “Don’t touch this record, it’s mine,” made me feel really proud. That was the first record I bought. The concept of being a crate digger started in 1978. It was a record called “Space Funk”, by Manzel. And the reason for that was because it came out that same year. It was a good record for DJs and b-boys, and as I was still a b-boy, I chose it. But after that I didn’t stop buying until ’95, ’96. Serko Fu How many records do you own? Breakbeat Lou Last I checked, after the purge... The most I ever had was a little over 100,000. And now I have 75,000. Those are just the LPs. Now, the 12”s, the singles, I have 12,000, and around 7,000 45s. Serko Fu So few! Breakbeat Lou Just a small amount. Serko Fu You told us about how it started, how you experienced it, how you started collecting, how you became a DJ. And in the ’80s it was a different story, right? Everything started to change. I know you were very close to everything. I know you have many stories; you were close to Scott La Rock and Boogie Down Productions. Could you tell us something about those days, some stories? Breakbeat Lou The first time I saw Scott La Rock, I don’t know if you remember but in the ’80s, the ’90s… I don’t know if they still exist, record pools. I met him back then. Columbia Records held meetings every Monday called The Best Club. And as he was one of the most popular DJs, like me, we met right there. He asked me, “Where do you live?” and I said, “In the Bronx.” And he said, “I’m going to hold a record pool in the Bronx.” And I said, “I go to one already, that’s why I know about them,” “OK, but please come to mine.” And we began our friendship after that, that’s how it started. And Scott La Rock was someone who really lived the culture from the heart, truly. If you don’t know, he was the one who made the cassette recordings of Slick Rick’s “La Di Da Di” and “Treat Her Like a Prostitute.” At a club called Broadway 96. And back then, I remember that as I was already producing things, he called me one day and told me, “Can you come to my place? I know you’re doing quite a bit and I want help with something.” And I said, “OK, I’m on my way.” He’d bought an E-mu Drumulator, and he didn’t know how to use it. And as I was doing recordings already I taught him how to program that machine. And two weeks later he says, “I just signed a contract because I met a guy who’s a rapper and we’re going to do some recordings.” And I asked him, “Tell me how you met him?” And there was a drawing on his cassette and he said that this guy had made the drawing a long time ago, and the guy was called KRS-One. And he says, “He has a gift for recording. I met him at work,” because back then he was a social worker and KRS-One’s family lived in a shelter, so that’s where he met him. And he tells me, “I have a contract that I’m going to sign, and the recording is mostly finished, but I know this isn’t the end – soon he’ll make another record and I’ll call you.” Let’s move forward a bit. The record came out, “South Bronx”, “The Bridge is Over.” They got a contract with Jive Records. He called me a week before getting killed and he said, “I need help with this, let’s meet in two weeks, when I come back from signing the contract.” And I never saw him again. What I can say is that he was one of the legends, and he never saw the end of his career. Serko Fu Back then you were more involved in production and doing projects. In the studio, recording, etc. Hip-hop was already there, but there was a time, I don’t know in which part of the ’80s, when something existed that they called freestyle, but not the kind you do [points to audience], don’t get excited. It was Latin freestyle, right? What was Latin freestyle; what did they call Latin freestyle? Breakbeat Lou It started, if we’re going to talk about the beginning, with the fact that Latinos were always around hip-hop. Since the beginning. In the beginning, hip-hop records, the tempo was around 101 to 110, tops. And a record came out, called “Planet Rock” that reaches 120; it was faster music. And when that record came out, as Latinos liked to dance to salsa, bomba, cha-cha-chá – I mean, things with more rhythm – that record was really popular in New York with the original hip-hop crowd and the Latin hip-hop crowd. On that same release John Robie and Arthur Baker also included a song called “Play at Your Own Risk,” by a group called Planet Patrol, and if you see the 2-inch tape, both songs are on the same tape. Both songs came out six weeks apart. The “Play at Your Own Risk” record was usually played at the Fun House, at The Roxy, or at Danceteria; the same Latin youth that usually danced to the hip-hop records lost their minds when they played this music. They started dancing. As if it was the same kind of music they danced to at Copacabana, or the Palladium. So they started to call us “Latin Hip-Hoppers.” Because we usually dressed the same as the regular hip-hop crowd, but when it was time to dance to fast-paced music, mostly the Latinos
were the ones who danced, not Americans or those kind of people. Back then the first name for that kind of music was freestyle, like the records we sang, Lisa Lisa, Trinere, Debbie Deb or that crowd, the first name for it was Latin hip-hop. Because back then, the records with that kind of music, that were incredible in my opinion, were C-Bank’s “One More Shot” and “Let the Music Play” by Shannon. Serko Fu Hey, we’re now approaching the late ’80s. Back then there was a lot of music that was barely being labeled, and someone names it, right? Be it for the dances or for the raps. You were involved in [the project] 2 in a Room, right? Can you tell us a bit about that too? Breakbeat Lou 2 in a Room was a project launched by Cutting Records. They wanted to put two producers in a room to make songs. The first room was for me and Chep Nuñez, the second room was for Todd Terry and Little Louie Vega, the third room was for George Morel and another guy called Tony Maserati. And the last room was Roger Pauletta and Dose Material, who were the only ones with vocals. Those were real songs, not instrumentals. The record made by George Morel, called “As It Grooves,” was the first to be played, mainly on New York stations and mostly in England. What the Cutting Records president, Aldo [Marin], wanted to do was to, first, put a girl on it to sing, but they never got the singer. So he said, “Let’s put Dose,” who already has a record, with George Morel in a room and see what happens. The record was going to be “As It Grooves,” but what Dose wrote was called “Wiggle It.” And that song was a hit. It went gold in the US, gold in England, gold in Germany and gold in Switzerland. Many stories. Serko Fu So, that was your journey in hip-hop. And getting to Street Beat [Records], how did you found it? How did you decide, “OK, let’s make a compilation of breaks?” How did you conceive of it? Breakbeat Lou That was in two stages; the first was in 1980 and was a record called Fusion Beats, and the company was called Bozo Meko. And the reason for that were the two recordings that Bambaataa gave Lenny [Roberts] and me. They were both recorded in the Bronx. One was Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, and the other was what they called a “post tape” by a DJ called Afrika Islam, who no one knows is brown, American and Puerto Rican. And there’s Latin blood tied into all this again. That record was really popular in those times. There was another compilation called Super Disco Breaks. But the recordings weren’t good. So we came out with a record called Octopus Breakbeats, that were pirate records from 1980 to ‘84. In ‘84 music was changing so much. What happened was that instead of DJs cutting up breakbeats, they were cutting up what they called “rap records.” Like “Love Rap”, “Feel the Heartbeat,” “Sucka M.C.’s,” and things like that. If the foundation of something doesn’t stay true to what it’s supposed to be, I don’t think it’s going to last. So we both decided we’d give [DJs and producers] the materials for the records that played in the jams, that ended up being the first nine volumes [of Ultimate Breaks and Beats], so they’d at least have the songs that really started the culture. So that was from ‘80 to ‘84. In ‘84 everybody thought that hip-hop wasn’t going to last. That’s when Crazy Legs came and decided to make a movie, so he worked on Flashdance. And that’s when we could say the world saw hip-hop with new eyes. And it wasn’t a puppet show, or something to do with gangs, or something illegal. They saw this was a real art. When they saw the music touched the dancers’ souls, that’s when they could see it was amazing. And then Beat Street happened. And I think that was the beginning of what we now know as hip-hop. Serko Fu Speaking about those compilations, I know they’ve used many iconic breaks. Breaks used by people like Marley Marl and a lot more. Breakbeat Lou It’s an amazing thing, I never thought those records were going to be what they are now. At first, I thought it was going to be a tool for DJs, nothing else. It started in 1986, when Marley Marl discovered you could sample and pick out the drums individually, and put them in [productions], and an amazing thing began right then. At that time, when we came out with Street Beat Records, which was also in ’86, what everyone thought hip-hop was going to be had changed. And it changed so much that in 1995, in the Billboard top 100 singles chart, of the 52 weeks in the year, for 37 weeks there were records [charted] that sampled something from Street Beat Records. Mariah Carey sampled “Blind Alley,” Janet Jackson sampled “Impeach The President,” and the last group, which always annoys me, Hanson’s “MMMBop,” which samples “Synthetic Substitution,” if you watch the beginning of Hanson[‘s video] they play “Synthetic Substitution” and then the younger one plays on that same rhythm. 37 weeks in 1995, in those weeks if it wasn’t for those compilations we put out, those songs wouldn’t have been made. Serko Fu So, OK. You already told us a bit about the songs that were used for your compilations. There’s one especially that we all know, and I say it again, we may know it without realizing it, and that’s the Amen break, or the Amen, that many of us may not know by name but have surely heard it, be it in rap, in drum & bass, and you could say it made waves, right? Jungle… Breakbeat Lou I mean, it was appropriated for many songs. Chicago house, Detroit house... Serko Fu Do you remember when you found that break? Breakbeat Lou I didn’t find it, Afrika Bambaataa did. I credit Afrika Bambaataa, it was in 1980. The first time I knew what that record really was. And we put it in volume one. If you know and see volume one of Ultimate Breaks & Beats, that’s the second song we put in that compilation. And to me the really amazing thing about that record was that it was really fast. But because of how we played it, it was a 45 RPM [record], we played it at 33 RPM and it was what you call a real ‘bop your head’ hip-hop beat. So, that recording, this record itself they say is the most sampled record in history. There is no record that was more sampled than that one. If it wasn’t for us that record wouldn’t be in the world like it is right now. Serko Fu And when you listened to it, when you had it, did you think it was going to be anything special? Or did you see it like any other good break? Breakbeat Lou It was the “soup of the day” break, the music of the moment. We didn’t think that 30 or 40 years later it would have the history it has now. Remember that it was a B-side of a record that won a Grammy. And then we changed how it originally sounded, it wasn’t that way. It originally wasn’t fast, then slow and then fast again. The sound is something that, I can’t explain how it had such a big influence. If one looks now so many records that exploded, by N.W.A., Mantronix, Ultramagnetic MCs, EPMD, Public Enemy, all those people used that record in some way or another. Serko Fu What would your most precious record be? A record you’d say, “This is my jewel,” be it because of its history or the value it has for you? Breakbeat Lou The record is “Beggin’” by Frankie Valli & The Four Seasons, and the reason is because it belonged to my mom. And my mom... In 2008. I got out of the industry in ’95, because of my family and it’s like that, not because of something else. My mom tells me in 2008, “There will come a time when the world will recognize you for what you did.” And I replied, “Mom, I’m working in a bank now, what’s all that about?” That was in February 2008. In October 2008, God took her. In April 2009, I don’t know what happened but Kenny Dope wanted to know who the person was called Louis Flores who appeared on the records [credits]. And then began what we have now: Me being here, in all these places, in Cuba, which was a dream of mine, coming to this precious island. Like we call it, the twin island. And being around Latin hip-hop culture, as we are never given enough credit for being involved in this. And having the opportunity to tell the story. And reaching I don’t know how many people who are going to watch this recording. All because of... The love my mom had for music, the love my mom had for me. And as for that record called “Beggin’,” it’s a 45 that I still have to this date, and that you can buy in any store in the secondhand section for six or seven dollars, or whatever. To me, that record is priceless. Serko Fu Talking about producing, about crates and about digging, you’re very close with Diamond D, Buckwild, people from Diggin’ in the Crates [crew], aren’t you? You were there, I imagine, since before the group was formed. Can you tell us a bit about that? Breakbeat Lou Yes, of course. As I’m a good friend of Jazzy Jay, of the Zulu Nation, or Jazzy Five, or Strong City Records. The first recording Diamond D did was for a group called Ultimate Force. I met him when I worked at a record store in the Bronx; he came around all the time. And he told me, “I know you make these records, listen,” he gave me a cassette, “I want to know what you think about this.” And to me it was something incredible because he used a record called... If I remember correctly... “How Time Passes.” But it was a breakbeat too, it was amazing. He said, “Jazzy Jay helped me, and I have many more that I’m going to make. I’ve got two more friends helping me with the recording.” The two friends were Showbiz and Lord Finesse. And those days with Lord Finesse we talked, usually, almost every day. Because we were colleagues, besides being music partners, and we played several times a year together in different places. He’s like a brother to me, because we’re of one mind in how we see music, as men, as third world people, in our opinions of what things should be like, or in seeing what we can do to improve our culture, called hip-hop. They always tell me about Buckwild, Showbiz, A.G... That if it wasn’t for us inspiring them to be diggers… because they mostly didn’t have that knowledge until they bought the Ultimate Breaks & Beats compilation. It was then that they had that idea and said, “Oh, if these records are like this, let’s see what other records this artist has that have this kind of music. Or let’s see, if this person recorded with these artists, we’ll see what they did with these other artists.” That was before we could listen to records on a record player [in a shop], like we can now. You had to do it like I did. I went to those places, picked up a record, smelled it, I looked at it like this, put it down and walked away, went back to look at it again. I looked at the little paper again and I checked out the clothes they had on at the time, and the credits, and in what city it was recorded in, if their afro was a bit crooked. It’s an incredible thing how one looks for something that can tell you, “Yes, this is funky.” That’s how we bought them back then. And still, when I’m buying now, I never listen to the records, I look at them, I smell them, and if they look right I buy them. Serko Fu What would be your craziest story of finding a record? Breakbeat Lou Lenny and I went to a place, I remember it well, it was in Tennessee or something. We usually had a trick in those days. I don’t know if you know what a wooden pallet is, where they put the products, boxes, like this. So when we went shopping, we laid a pallet, and put the records we were going to buy on it. Back then many people didn’t know the record called “A Little Less Conversation,” by Elvis Presley. Normally, at that time the cheapest you could buy it for was 15 dollars. But the boxes were wet and very dirty. What I did was pick up the box and move it closer to where we were, and mostly when we went shopping, the place we went to, they didn’t look at the records that were on the pallet. They said, “If this is what you’re taking, this is what we’re charging.” At that time there was minimum 150 of those Elvis Presley records. Normally, if we bought it then it was going to cost us two, three dollars. We paid 55 cents for those records, and afterwards we sold them for 25 to 55 dollars each. Serko Fu What is the most you’ve paid for a record? Breakbeat Lou Nobody is going to believe this, let’s say the three best. I went to the Salvation Army; do you know the record “Vitamin C,” by Can? It’s a b-boy record. I don’t know if I remember... Let’s say the record cost at least 150 dollars, I paid three dollars for that record. Three dollars. Now, the most I’ve paid for a record was 75 dollars and it was an Italian promo only copy of “Take Me to the Mardi Gras.” Rare, very rare. Right now it’s at least 150 dollars, and that’s not mint, and I bought it mint. Serko Fu Following up, and picking up what you were telling me a little while ago. You were saying that if they take away the foundation, it would get lost and it wouldn’t be maintained. Do you think that now, with copyright issues and all that, creativity is being limited? Or is it pushing artists to seek new strategies? What do you think about all that? Breakbeat Lou I’m different from everyone else, I think that if music belongs to someone you have to pay them, because as an artist I would like to be paid. If you really have the gift of being creative, you don’t need samples or anything. If it comes from your heart, from your soul, you can make the best music that can be made. Because that music was made back then, and if it was possible then, why wouldn’t it be possible now? That’s my opinion. I’m very different, I’m not saying either that the ’90s are the best there is, music-wise. There was a lot of good music, yes, but there was a lot of bad music too. Like they say now about trap. To me, as a DJ, from the beginning to when I die, if I play music that makes the floor jump, it can be anything. My job is to do that, really. Like I say, a record like “Panda” by Desiigner, what are these guys saying? I have no idea what they’re saying, but when you play that record on an amazing system, it doesn’t give you any choice but to jump. Music gets to me more, before the lyrics. But there’s good music and bad music now, and there was always good and bad music. Serko Fu Speaking about 2019, I know you’re still working, you’re still producing and I noticed that currently, being from the East Coast, New York, you’re collaborating with one of the most important collectives, a group that is part of one of the most important collectives from the West Coast, which is Souls of Mischief, from Hieroglyphics. How did that come about? Breakbeat Lou Well, this is how it started. I’m good friends with Peanut Butter Wolf, who owns Stones Throw Records. There was a party called Motown On Mondays that you see there [points behind him]. I was at that party, and Opio was at that party and I met him. The next day we went out, as Opio’s girlfriend worked with Peanut Butter Wolf, and we went out to lunch. He asked me if I was still producing and I told him I was. He said, “Can we work on something?” And I told him, “Well, OK.” It was the same time of year as right now, it was around Biggie’s anniversary, and I was going to record a tribute for Biggie and I was looking for another MC to help, so I told him, “We can do this.” We went to the studio, recorded, and it was amazing. If people don’t know they never recorded together, but when you hear the recording it seems as if they were in the same place. We did that recording, and he says, “I want to do another project. Would you like to work with me?” I told him, “Let’s do a few songs, no problem.” Those songs were incredible. He says, “We should to do a five song EP.” We did the five songs, and it’s not because it’s me, but they were amazing. He’s the kind of guy I like, a type of artist who doesn’t have a problem with... Serko Fu Being directed? Breakbeat Lou No, you don’t produce him. Mainly all rappers now, MCs, they think it’s all in their mind and that’s how it has to be. That’s not right, we all have our jobs. There are beatmakers and there are producers. I know how to do both things, god gave me that blessing. But I like to work with an artist in person. I don’t really like to send someone a beat. So, with my own money I went to Los Angeles every month to see what he was doing. We came out with incredible songs. Right now we’re ready to record the last two songs, with Casual, with O.C., and god willing, either Styles P or Jadakiss. We’re on that. We finished recording just now with Havoc, Erik Sermon, Bahamadia, Pharoahe Monch, and they came out great. We have ’90s style hip-hop, yes. There are some trap-like songs that when people hear them they’ll say, “Louis doing trap?” Yes, Louis doing trap. To me it’s music. It isn’t music to everyone in this world, but we’re doing things right. You will soon hear something that will be, not the best project in the world, but a project to be remembered years and years from now. Serko Fu What advice would you give to everyone doing rap, hip-hop in Latin America or over here? Breakbeat Lou I’m glad you asked that question, because in our hip-hop culture everyone makes music about girls, money or getting high. To me if you don’t put your heart in it, your soul, like we say, if you’re not making songs with your blood, sweat and tears, don’t make them at all. Stop. Make something else. Or make that and don’t call it hip-hop, because hip-hop culture started from something like this, from using systems of different brands, like, everyone has two Technics
and a mixer now, I remember when there was a Technics and a Fisher [Price], and a mixer with a channel working on something and another channel on something else. We had speakers of different brands, different sizes. We had receivers and amplifiers, and we had cables all taped up because they weren’t long enough. There was pride in doing things, we could say we did them together and we didn’t really have the resources. But we did it because it came from the soul, from the heart, from love, from culture. First from music, from culture, and from ourselves. Because I can’t say I did something... I can’t play this CD, and say, “I invented this,” if I never did. But if I play it, and say, “I like how it plays,” it’s more real. This is how it has to be, with pride but with respect too, for being part of a culture, hip-hop culture, DJ culture,
MC culture, or musicians’ culture, whatever. It has to be honest pride and something from the heart, really. Serko Fu Let’s hear it for the legend Breakbeat Lou, please. [applause] Breakbeat Lou Thank you, thank you. Serko Fu Let’s do a Q&A session. I don’t know if there’s anybody who has a question or a comment for our guest. There’s one. Audience Member What’s up with all these cats putting out records with all our samples? What do you think about that? Audience Member What does that mean? Audience Member It means that DJ Premier was a bit angry at that time, after [Ultimate Beats & Breaks] albums came out there were other labels publishing albums full of songs ready to sample. And DJ Premier, producers like us, making an effort looking for samples and these are just there for the taking. Breakbeat Lou When he first came out with [the skit about sampling on the album Moment Of Truth] I confronted him and asked him, “What does this mean?” And he said, “Louis, this is not for you.” The reason was another record company. Let’s give an example. Like a food recipe given to you by your mom, your granny, whatever, and it’s your family’s. I take that recipe and I say, “I’m telling everyone your paella is made this way.” That’s what happened. Instead of putting out, “This is the recording, this is the artist, this is the year it came out, this is the label.” I think the reason we made [Ultimate] Breaks and Beats was so that the second and third and all the other generations of DJs after the first one, had the right tools to continue building hip-hop. What these guys did, was they wanted to pat themselves on the back and say, “If you got it, I can get it, too.” And no. “You don’t get it because you didn’t work your ass off, get your nails and clothes dirty searching for records, get it?” I asked Premier, I asked Diggin’ in the Crates, I asked Pete Rock. They said, “No, it’s not for you. If it wasn’t for you we wouldn’t be here,” but people taking the idea out of context and trying to make it something else to give themselves credit is not fair. Audience Member I’m from Spain, and what I’m seeing in hip-hop circles in general or urban music in particular, is that due to the internet, trends change very quickly. In fact, being a mainstream artist can last a few months. And after a few months, bye. And there’s a new trend. What I’m saying is that
in the United States when an artist becomes trendy but doesn’t cross the mainstream line… I mean, Lil Wayne and Evidence aren’t the same. For example, Evidence, after a while, even though he got a good audience, a good-sized audience, he didn’t get to be like Eminem. Is it possible for him to keep making a living out of music? Breakbeat Lou Right now, yes. In the ’90s the most you could make from a record was 70 cents. And sell 6,000 copies. If you did it yourself you could make 2,50 and sell at least 40,000 copies. Which one gets you more money? Which one more control? Today, really, you can make music exactly like you want with no one telling you, “No, no, this is going to go badly, people won’t like it, I want you
to sound more like Drake, I want you to be more like Lil Wayne.” Right now any kid can go to eBay, buy an Apple computer, used, for 700 dollars. It usually comes with GarageBand, right? You can record anything, put it on iTunes, and if you have an Instagram or Facebook account with over 150 followers, 10% of that, you can put out a song in less than a day or two, and 10 people can listen to it and say it’s awesome and your head gets like this [makes big head motion]. In our times, at first to release a song, you had to spend 250 dollars buying tape, 2-inch tape. After that you had to work again, and get at least 600 dollars to rent a studio, at least 10 hours, to record. No, to produce the album. Back then not everyone had an MPC, like what you can buy now, or [Native Instruments] Maschine or FruityLoops. You had to go to a studio that had the equipment, to work and try to get the production done in less than 10 hours, then keep at it for another 10 hours to record the song, and after that, like five hours to mix it. That’s 500, 500 and 250, 750 plus the 250 and now it’s more than 1,000 dollars just recording and mixing the song. If you want to release it you need to master it. Mastering costs at least 700 or 800 dollars. Finish that and you’re almost up to 2,000 dollars. Now you have to think, if it’s a 12”, if you’ll have a cover or a generic cover. Let’s go with a generic cover. You gotta press up at least a thousand copies which is gonna cost you another 1,000 dollars. Nobody has heard the record yet. You’re up to almost 3,000 dollars to make a recording and put it on wax or vinyl, and no one has heard it yet. Then you have to work again, and if you have a car, go to every mom and pop store and say, “Can you pick up five copies on consignment?” To see what happens with the record. Right now, if you have 700 dollars you can make a recording that doesn’t sound good at all, but if a friend says, “This is good,” it goes to your head. That’s why you think everything sounds the same now, because everyone wants to make whatever that guy did, or that other guy. If you can buy FruityLoops and you have an 808 sample pack and use the same rhythm, it feels like, [makes motion] “I’m scratching my head, I’m scratching my head.” That’s what happens, because now it’s not trendy to feel pride in making real songs. That’s what’s happening with trap, too, what I call “gun talk records.” No record is over 76 beats per minute. Just talking about drugs and shootings, and stuff like that. Nothing else. To me songs have to have knowledge, but they also have to talk to you. Records like... I can’t say it here because you will get angry, but if you rap and you don’t have hooks, you’re just making gun talk lyrics, and how many keys I have, and how many jewels I have, and I’ll beat you up. There’s no substance. I think these aren’t songs with a message, like “Eric B. Is President,” or something comical, like “Pickin’ Boogers” by Biz Markie, or Slick Rick “La Di Da Di,” things like that, stories, like Biggie Smalls. You can actually close your eyes, listen to “Warning” by Biggie Smalls and see what’s happening because the lyrics are amazing. And now, you know, [makes motion] “I scratch my head, I scratch my head.” We have another one here. Audience Member Streaming music lowers quality, right? What is the best quality format, CD or vinyl? Breakbeat Lou The best sound, the proper sound is tape sound, reel-to-reel tape, and then vinyl. Because digital... In digital formats, voice is translated into a wave. Digital is zeros and ones, so sound plays like this [makes 0, 1 motion]. In digital it plays like this. It jumps. It’s not playing the whole sound, if you play in a wave it goes like this [makes wave motion]. And this is the complete sound, see this gap? There’s sound there. Digital doesn’t pick that up, digital is just this, zeros and ones. The sound wave contains the complete sound, high and low. So, tape or vinyl. Audience Member Thank you. Breakbeat Lou You’re welcome. Another question over here. Audience Member In Wikipedia, for example, the Spanish Wikipedia, it says that trap is a genre that is inspired by hip-hop, but a separate genre. In the English Wikipedia, however, it says it’s a subgenre of hip-hop. Which is what I say. Even if it sounds bad to some, or they’re scared of it. Breakbeat Lou Trap is generally live music, but music that talks about drugs. Because the trap is where you pay money to get drugs. That’s where the word trap comes from. But what happened when trap appeared, the liveliness of it has to do with drugs and strip clubs. Strip club music is very lively, dirty south music. So that’s where it comes from. To me, as long as it has musical quality and it makes you move... The only problem I have with it, my problem with the so-called trap, is the quality of the lyrics. I scratch my head. You see? If you give me the instrumental, I’ll dance to it all day. Because it sounds good. There’s bad trap and there’s good trap. I’ve heard music from T.I. that sounds incredible. Young Jeezy did stuff like that. Even Drake’s done pretty decent trap. J. Cole has done trap that’s pretty decent. It’s not the genre, or the title, it’s just that, mostly... Everyone generally picks the easy way out. If you made a trap song that sounds one way, then he comes and makes a trap song that sounds just like yours. I have to listen to a song at least 30 or 40 seconds to know who the artist is. Because in the beginning it all sounds the same. Audience Member What artist do you like the most, if you like any, of this new wave? Or do you not like any? Breakbeat Lou No, no, because the thing is, there are songs that may rock, Lil Boosie’s done songs that rock. It’s more about the type of rap song than the artist. Now, if you ask me for an artist from the ’90s, you can say Rakim, because his discography is something amazing. Public Enemy, EPMD. Now I ask you. Who do you think will be in a place in ten years that you will be able to say, “Ah, this guy was dope?” Audience Member Breakbeat Lou But he’s not really trap. He does trap music. Audience Member From trap? That’s depends, really. Drake? Breakbeat Lou But he’s not all trap. That’s why I say there’s no artist that does only trap. Drake makes trap songs, Kendrick too, Jay Rock too, but not everything they make is trap. Because they put a little boom bap in there. No one does just trap, you know? Audience Member Migos? Kidding. Audience Member Why do you think trap started? Breakbeat Lou It’s dancing music. When there’s something that gets people into dance clubs, it’s gonna grow. Audience Member What did people who resisted hip-hop say about it when it came about? What criticisms did you face back then? Breakbeat Lou We’ll talk about lyrics, too. Big Daddy Kane didn’t sound like Rakim, Rakim didn’t sound like EPMD. EPMD didn’t sound like Public Enemy. Public Enemy did not sound like Salt-N-Pepa. Now I have to listen to a song at least 30 seconds to know who it is. And not even that. I mix up Future with Drake, all of them, I don’t know which is which. Because they all mostly sound the same, they all have the same producers. Imagine, with all the drum machine sounds you can use, but they just use the same tone and the same 808 sound. I don’t know, I don’t get it. Audience Member What rhythm is coming up next, after trap? That is, out of everything you know? Breakbeat Lou To me, I think that what should come back is regular R&B music. Dance R&B, something like a new jack swing, but not quite. I think that pride in creating music hasn’t picked up, because right now there’s isn’t any music in this generation of hip-hop. It’s hard to say that there’s something unique or something that opens your eyes and makes you say, “This is amazing!” There’s nothing original... But it’s not all like that, there are some amazing albums. Like in every genre. But in general, or in everything that is trap music there’s nothing that makes you say, “This really is music and it’s going to remain relevant over time and make history.” Not right now. Audience Member How would you advise us to have the patience to know that everything takes time? Sometimes you just want to see numbers. Sometimes you base yourself on them because people trust them. For example, if something has millions of listens even though it’s crap, on the radio they say, “Hey, have you listened to that?” People on videos, “Did you see that?” Fans themselves say, “I have to see it because they’re seeing it.” It gains some kind of credit. What advice could you give us so we have the patience to create something that hasn’t been heard before? You know what I’m saying? Breakbeat Lou No, I don’t think it’s about patience. Keep doing what you’re doing, because your time will come. Don’t stop, because if we’d stopped in the ’80s, we wouldn’t be here now. If we’d stopped in the ’90s, we wouldn’t be here now. Think that from ’79 to ’83 it was mostly musicians who played music for rappers. Then the drum machine era started, which is when the 808, the DMX and the LinnDrum came out. Every album had that same sound. Everything sounded the same, like trap right now. Then Marley Marl came out, sampling came out and he could pull out sounds and put them in individually. And play the same rhythm with sounds from other records, and that was the best time to create things because ideas weren’t constrained by equipment, but by people’s minds. You can think like Public Enemy thought. When they came out no one could understand… what was that sound, that at first is like something that’s going to give me a headache, but listening to it you say, “This is amazing.” Why? While Marley Marl used two or three sounds, Public Enemy used 10 to 15 or 20 sounds in one song. And they used a two-second sound in a way no one had heard before. They had that gift, like a jazz musician’s. In jazz music the drums play a rhythm and the bass another and the trumpet another, but everything sounds great. That’s what happened when the Bomb Squad did what I just said with Public Enemy. They didn’t wait for anybody. They kept on doing what they were doing. You listen to their first LP and then listen to It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back, they’re very different things. Because they weren’t waiting. They didn’t wait for EPMD to come out with them, they didn’t wait for Rakim to come out with them. They said, “Let’s do this and this is what it’ll be.” If you wait you’ll never get there. Like they say in English, “Don’t let the waves take you where it is, swim to where you need to go.” Like a salmon that swims against the current. You have to be like a salmon. Audience Member In our circles there are people who don’t listen to rap and even though they don’t listen to rap they like the battles because it’s a show that’s very easy to watch. It’s remarkable to me that in the US, a society characterized by quick consumption of these kinds of things, where this appeared for the first time, it’s remarkable that being from Spain, Mexico, Venezuela, we can go to Chile and get 20,000 people in a place just with freestyle rap battles, and people in the audience don’t even have to like rap. And in the US, which as a society is more into consumerism than ours, that doesn’t happen. Do you know why? Breakbeat Lou Like I say, community is different. Because in the US, rap is the only kind of music in which the OGs and new jacks don’t get along. In rock you don’t hear anything about Guns N’ Roses not getting along with Aerosmith, or saying Aerosmith is wack, or things like that. You don’t hear in R&B that Luther Vandross didn’t get along with Bobby Brown for some reason. It’s only hip-hop culture that’s like this. The weirdest thing is that even though there are grandparents with grandchildren who like the same kind of music, the grandfather doesn’t like the same music as the grandchild. But it’s all rap. I think it’s about pride, because I’m different, I have children your age, and I came back to hip-hop culture, as I am here now, because of my son, because he asked, “Daddy, if you want me to listen to the hip-hop you like, why don’t you listen to what I like?” And I said, “It’s true.” And like with everything, there’s good and there’s bad. I think, as a DJ, and I’m not the best, but I know that if you get in somewhere and I’m playing there, you’ll come out with three things: sore feet, wet clothes and the memory of Breakbeat Lou playing that record. Because that’s my job, to play records. Like, I hated the record “I Will Survive” by Gloria Gaynor, but I had to play it, because I had to. Like right now, if I have to play Lil Weezy, or whatever the guy’s name is, I’m gonna play it. Because my job is to make sure that everybody here has a good time. If I’m playing a record and I see him right there, and he’s all night like this, he is my target to make him change his mind about me. You know what I’m saying? Sorry I’m speaking in English, but it’s the only way I can explain it. The problem with the United States, with music, especially hip-hop, is that we are so spoiled with it, because it was created by us. And we are so stuck up with it that we feel that only our opinion matters, no matter who we are. And it shouldn’t be that way. If I’ve been present since the beginning it doesn’t mean my vision about music is better than yours, you know? Or vice versa. That’s the problem. To me it’s not necessary to say that the music you have and like is not really music. What I say to all the OGs. In the beginning of battle rapping, which was Kool Moe Dee and Busy Bee, Kool Moe Dee is considered a lyrical rapper, Busy Bee not. But right now both are legendary. In the ’80s it was KRS-One, Rakim, Big Daddy Kane. And then you have Kid ‘n Play, Kwamé and Salt-N-Pepa, but they’re all legends now. Why do we now have J. Cole,
Kendrick Lamar and Jay Rock, and we have Drake, Weezy or Lil Boosie, and we can’t say that they’re all good? You know? Being honest, it’s not cool, mostly with OGs. And in my opinion, as a grown man, how am I going to tell another grown man, “Your music is worthless.” Not at all. What I have to do, me being an OG, for example, is to point out to you more or less how to appreciate it. Because if I tell you I want to appreciate your music, you, as a human being, are going to say, “Put your own music on, let’s see if I can appreciate it too.” That’s the first problem, and I don’t think it starts with the young ones but rather with us old timers. We have to teach you. If we want you to understand, we have to teach you how to understand. Audience Member I wanted to talk about freestyle. I think by the time of Supernatural, Craig G and Juice,
freestyle was going strong, right? I saw a video from when Super Nat competed with Craig G, and they said that they were watching from Japan, from South America, from Russia. I mean, everyone wanted to see that battle, and it was freestyle. What happened, I imagine, is that it had its boom and afterwards it didn’t continue. Breakbeat Lou It was only those two. Serko Fu It was a group, there weren’t that many people doing it. Breakbeat Lou Imagine, there was people from Canada, people from the US, I didn’t know there were Latin Americans. I had no idea until I’m watching this and I’m like, “Wow!” To me it’s an art, putting lyrics to something, some people write it beforehand, some people improvise, like Super Nat. Super Nat is amazing, because every time he sees me in the audience he always adds me to the lyrics, always, no matter what. He sees me 10 miles away, or nearby, he always adds my name in, and he improvises it, because he didn’t know I’d be there. I never tell him I’m going to be there. I stand at the front on purpose so people will know that what he’s doing really is art. I think it’s a gift if you can improvise stuff like that, because I don’t find it easy at all. Serko Fu Well, let’s hear it for Breakbeat Lou. Thank you very much, Lou. [applause]

---

Title: DJ Vibe
Date: 2019-09-26
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/dj-vibe/

DJ Vibe
In 1980s Lisbon the resident DJ wasn’t simply housewarming for the main act – they were the only act. For António Pereira, AKA DJ Vibe, that meant the ability to stretch selections across genres and styles, entertaining crowds with everything from new wave, disco and slow jams to the new sounds of acid house and rave. The son of a record store owner, Pereira got his break in the city’s burgeoning nightclub scene while still a teenager, eventually becoming the resident at institutions such as Plateau and Kremlin. In 1993, after close to a decade behind the decks, Pereira teamed up with Rui Da Silva as the Underground Sound of Lisbon, releasing a string of singles on local label Kaos Records. Inspired by the harder and deeper end of house music, the duo’s “So Get Up” would eventually make its way to New York City and into the hands of Junior Vasquez at the Sound Factory. The record became an underground sensation, kickstarting a relationship between the two local scenes that cemented the trance-like tribal sound both would become famous for.
In this public lecture in Lisbon, Pereira shared stories of Lisbon’s early club culture, how DJs and venues had to operate within existing cultural constrictions and just how Lisbon’s tribal sound made the jump over the Atlantic.
Hosted by Lauren Martin Hello everyone. How are we doing? Good. Good. Nice to see you all. Thanks for coming on such a nice day, but you have a lot of nice days here. It’s really lovely to be in Lisbon to be hosting a lecture with someone who’s been so integral to the development of modern music in the city and in Portugal. We’ve got a little pile of records here and we’re going to work through them, play music and talk about history and the stories of how Portuguese club music evolved. So please help me welcome DJ Vibe. [applause] DJ Vibe Hello, hello, thank you. Lauren Martin You’re comfortable? DJ Vibe Yeah, I’m good. Thank you. Lauren Martin Everything good. I kind of wanted to start right at the very beginning. And you mentioned briefly before we started that you grew up around records and you grew up almost in a record shop. Your dad had a record shop in Lisbon, right? DJ Vibe Yes. My father used to have a record store in [TK] in the ’80s, early ’80s. And around 12, 13 I started to really enjoy music and, you know, see all those records, sometimes at home because he used to go to Spain to import music for sale. At night, when it arrived at home, he’d take the records out from the car and it was all there with me. I’d be looking through those and see, what’s this? How does it sounds? We don’t have a system at home to listen to records. So I started to come with my mother, at the weekends, to the record store to be able to listen to those records. Lauren Martin If I walked into your dad’s record shop on a Saturday afternoon with you in the early ’80s, what kind of people would be there, what kind of characters would you see, and what kind of music would I be able to listen to? DJ Vibe Pretty much everything from Portuguese fado to soundtracks, rock, new wave, disco, funk, popular music. Everything. It was a record store, you have to have all those styles of music. So, some of the DJs used to come on Fridays at the record store because they used to buy records for some clubs around that time. Lauren Martin Do you remember the first records you might have heard at your dad’s record shop, where you’re like, “This is the coolest thing I’ve ever heard?” DJ Vibe It was a few, but maybe one of them. It was Peter Frampton Comes Alive! It was a double album recording live, from these guitars, guitar players, and I was like, every day I came to the record store the first record was that one I used to play. There was another one by Tina Charles and then Kraftwerk, Radioactivity. When it comes out, it blew my mind, it was like, “What the hell is this?” You know? With this electronic music. And yeah, this is the records that stuck in my mind. Lauren Martin And you say that you didn’t have any turntables at home. You didn’t have a DJ setup, so you could only play the records in the shop. DJ Vibe Exactly. Lauren Martin Did your dad let you DJ in the shop when you were a kid? DJ Vibe One of the shops. Because he start… He opened the first store in TK 4:11, and then it was another one under different, a different place near TK, but it was a different shopping center. And in that one there was two turntables, an amplifier with phono one and phono two, the mixer, the turntables don’t have pitch. So I learned to play on those turntables without a pitch. So I tried to find the rotation, playing with the knob, switch to 33 or 45, so I tried to find that place to give more or less speed to the other turntable to match the beat. And it was there I used to come more often and practice before I start to play in the clubs. Lauren Martin I ask this because you didn’t start DJing when you were 25 or 30, you started fairly, very young. How old were you when you started to DJ properly? In bars or in clubs? DJ Vibe Officially 15, I was turning 16 and, my birthday is in September, I started to work at that club in June. The owner didn’t even know my age because I don’t, I couldn’t get in, you know. It was like, I’m not 18 years old so I can’t go to the club. So, I went to that place one time to test if it feels good for me to play there. So I came to the club around 9:30, the club opens at 10. We used to do an hour of music, ambient music, and then we do the opening and start to build the night. And yeah, I did pretty much the whole night when I got there. You know, you have like two turntables with the pitch, which is easier, [compared] with how I learnt, you know. So, I did a whole night and stayed for six months, I guess, in that place, called Bataclan TK. Lauren Martin So when you finally had your 18th birthday and went to the club, they were like, “You’ve been lying for years about your age?” DJ Vibe Yeah well, I didn’t stay there too long. Not too long. Because at the same time there was different clubs doing matinées and it’s easier for me to get in into those matinées than at night. I tried to get in every weekend because we used to work in the record store and if the record store close at midnight, my father sometimes let me to go outside a little bit with some friends. Which was not easy because sometimes I can’t get in [the club] so I have to go back home. And yeah, it was a good time, trying to learn more about DJs, listen to the other DJs as well. But it was not easy because I was very young. Lauren Martin Tell me about those other DJs that you would go and see because this is like early to mid-’80s, you’re a young teenager, what kind of music is being played in clubs, if this is happening before house music even exists? What kind of records can you go out and people were dancing to? DJ Vibe It was more pop and rock back in those days, you know. After the revolution, ’74, ten years after, I guess it was around ’80s, early ’80s, a club called Trumps is open in Lisbon. It was the first LGBT club and there it was a guy called TK used to DJ and he was the one who have the best music, for me, in that time. So Trumps, it was one of those clubs and you can hear the disco and some funk from America because the imports are very difficult [to get] in those days. So he had some friends, they used to bring some music for him, very exclusive. And I went there one time and I get like, “Wow, what music is this?” Because I don’t know it. And that stayed with me until today. And yeah, we had also some club called [TK 09:40], which was a place where the bands, pop and alternative, they played live, which is not like dancing, but it was a bigger movement for that place. And pretty much Trumps I guess was the main one. There were others, clubs, more gentleman clubs and stuff like that, but I don’t go, usually. Lauren Martin So after Portugal became a democracy, and you’re saying that it was quite difficult to get import records, was it quite expensive and hard to get new music from outside Portugal? Did you have that experience? DJ Vibe Yes, I felt that at home when my father arrived with those imports. And within three years I start to go every month to Spain, myself, just to buy music you can find there. So I always have some secret weapons I can get. Lauren Martin Where did you go in Spain to buy records? DJ Vibe The record stores in Madrid. In Madrid, yeah. Lauren Martin Were there any stores in particular that you really loved that were bringing in new music from around Europe? DJ Vibe I try to remember the name of those stores. Lauren Martin It’s a long time ago, admittedly, so… DJ Vibe Yeah, I can’t remember the name. It was like two or three record stores, I always go there and then the big malls. They have also some vinyl because in Spain the market was bigger and they release more music than we used to have in Portugal. Lauren Martin When you were a young man and you were starting to DJ properly, you know, you’re young, you’re 16, 17, 18 in these clubs and you’re seeing lots of other DJs, play pop and rock music. What got into your head where you thought, “I want to try doing something a little bit different?” Do you remember what kind of records you might’ve heard that made you think that maybe people could dance to something other than the pop and rock music that they’re used to? DJ Vibe I always try to give something new in my nights. Play something different that people were never used to, never listened to before. So, that’s why. Because I’m very curious, always looking for new stuff, new music and try to show [the audience] what’s really new, you know. So I remember when I open a club called Alcântara-Mar in 1988 it was around when acid house comes up in the UK. I was there at that time. I went there to buy some music for the opening of the club and when I could start to play the acid house in Alcântara I always keep the last hour to show them the new stuff. OK. When the people are more high, crazy, so they can accept it better. And I tried to show them what’s happening that time with new music and they call me like, “Here we go this guy’s crazy. He’s playing music, the bubble music.” That’s how they called it. Lauren Martin They called it bubble music? DJ Vibe Bubble music. Lauren Martin Was that the sound? DJ Vibe To the electronic music, dance music, of the time. They call it the bubble music because the people they like to dance to guitars all the time, so, and there’s no guitars in electronic music, so it was like called the bubbles because the sounds I guess, and the kick drums. Lauren Martin I like that as a way to describe acid house. It sounds like bubbles. DJ Vibe Bubbles. Lauren Martin As they grow and grow, they burst. Then you’re like, “What just happened?” Is there a record from your stack here that you’d like to play as an example of like, the bubble music? DJ Vibe Yeah. Lauren Martin What have we got here? DJ Vibe So this is one of the records I would play a lot, every night pretty much because we play every night, not just the weekends. This is a track from Adonis, “No Way Back.” (music: Adonis – “No Way Back”) Lauren Martin That’s a real classic for the acid house sound. Did you buy that record when you went to London in the late ’80s? Because from the outside looking in, it seems like that trip to London had a huge impact on your style of DJing. What did you do when you went to London? Did you meet anyone in particular that introduced you to these records? I’d love to know more about that. DJ Vibe No, I just, I used to go to all the record stores, find the latest music and, and yeah, in ’87, ’88, I found this sound which is coming from Chicago and it was in England with a smiley everywhere, the yellow smileys. It was like, “Wow.” So I’m getting very interested in this sound and I brought some vinyl and start to play it here in Portugal. Lauren Martin I really liked the description of the bubble music and you were saying that in Portugal people really liked listening to guitar music, but maybe there were tracks in between those that you found interesting, like bands that were starting to use a synthesizer or things like that. How would you plan a set, to make people who didn’t really expect it get into the flow with you? DJ Vibe Well, it was like a crescendo during the whole night, from the first track to the last. I tried to build a set until the last hour, because I used to play the slows, there was a time in the night that was like half an hour where the music was slow. The people dancing [imitates couple dancing], you know? Yeah. And after the slow time, I began with the strong music, you know, so the people was more happy. They can get the girl in the slow. So they were more into it to show them how to dance or, I don’t know. So, it was much [easier]. It was like a gymnastic kinda, play the music at the right time at night. And I tried to do a crescendo, playing from reggae, funk, disco, pop and disco house and then acid house. Later was the new beat, then the techno from Germany, as well, trance. So I played… I played many hours during the night. So I am able to do all this, a variety of music and not get just one style of music. So… And also I can have lot of music and I can do that easy and it was not a problem. Lauren Martin Not a problem for you at all. DJ Vibe It wasn’t, yeah. Lauren Martin No problem. When it comes to these DJ residencies, when you think of a resident DJ now, a lot of the time they might be the person that plays for the first hour or the first two hours at a party, but the way you’re describing it is that there were no outside DJs coming in to play in clubs in Lisbon at that time in the late ’80s and early ’90s, it was only the resident all night. Can you tell us more about how that worked for the clubs? If I wanted to go see you, would I only see you at that one club in Lisbon? DJ Vibe Yes, because [at] that time the people don’t go out to listen to a DJ. The DJ was not… it was just one employee playing some music in the club, you know. I think the most important person in the club, back in those days, it was the doorman. So, I used to play, as a resident, in different clubs, major, the most important clubs, I guess in Lisbon, from ’85. Plateau, was one of them. It opened in ’85. It changed the way to be at night, the way to go out. Before that to go to the club, you knock at the door, ring the bell, and the doorman who opens looks at you [to decide] if he lets you come in. Yeah. If you can come in someone’s gonna take you to a table, you know, so you’re going to be there, stay at the table. You ordered your drinks, but you stay there. You don’t walk around the club. It was something. When Plateau opened, that changed completely, the people can feel free to walk around the club, there were no tables. It was just for dancing and drinking. This was a good change for the city also, because before, all the clubs, they used to be in the middle of the city, inside, neighborhood areas where people [were] sleeping and living. When Plateau opened in ’85, it opened near the river, [Avenida] 24 de Julho, which is today a big avenue for nightlife in Lisbon. That also was a big change because you can play music [for] more time, because the clubs always close at four. With Plateau, we start to push, four thirty, five, five thirty and you went until six in the morning. It was a change in that time for the nightlife in Portugal. Lauren Martin It’s so interesting to hear that because for the UK, if you went to a club in the middle of the ’80s, clubs didn’t look that special. They were kind of people dressed in jeans and a T-shirt, raving really hard. This almost sounds like a jazz bar, where it’s very formal. DJ Vibe It’s more controlled, I guess. That, in ’85, stopped when Plateau opened. After that it was Alcântara-Mar, it opened two years later. It was like Plateau, but bigger, it was the same owners. They opened that club, a more industry hall and little chic, it was a mix. It was until six in the morning, seven. It was a good period because a lot of people couldn’t get in Plateau because Plateau held 300 people, and Alcântara can hold 700. It was opening for a lot of people that want to go to the Plateau and can’t get in, now they have a new club they can come in. It was very interesting. Lauren Martin What would an average week look like for you when you were DJing in the late ’80s and early ’90s? Are you playing every single night of the week for eight, nine hours a night? How did you survive that? DJ Vibe I’m sleeping in the day. I don’t see the daylight for weeks, sometimes. But yeah, we open at ten at night, and they finish at six. You go to the bed at eight in the morning. Lauren Martin Is it every day of the week? DJ Vibe Every day. Every day of the week. Plateau, when I get there, it opens on a five, December, I start to play there on the seven. The first three months I didn’t have a day off. I was there every, every night. We were young so we were okay. We just want to party. Lauren Martin Speaking of those parties, is there maybe a record from your pile that you remember playing at an early residency and people really loved it? Is there anything from here? DJ Vibe Yeah. I don’t have a record of this one, but I used to play this a lot in Plateau. (music: Alexander Robotnick – “Problèmes D'Amour”) This is [from] Fuzz Dance called “Problèmes D'Amour”, and this is Alexander Robotnick. Lauren Martin Alexander Robotnick. I really like that track as an example of that time, because it sounds really like live electronic funk. You have the new acid house sounds in there, but it also feels like there’s a guitar in there somewhere, there’s a piano in there somewhere. DJ Vibe That’s before the acid house, actually. Plateau, it was famous also because of the music politics they have. Because the DJs don’t bring his music for the clubs. You go with the owner of the club every week to the record store to buy the music. Lauren Martin The owner of the club would go with the DJ to buy the records? DJ Vibe Yes. Lauren Martin So he knew what you played? DJ Vibe Yes. He came with me, I choose what I want. Sometimes he was saying, “Oh, this is too much. It’s too much money, really we can’t get all of these records.” Lauren Martin Oh, so he’s paying for them. DJ Vibe Of course [laughter]. The music, it was for the club. Lauren Martin Nice. DJ Vibe You just go, pick the records you like to play, he paid, you go. Lauren Martin I have never heard that before. Was it almost like how Larry Levan would have the wall of records in the club behind the booth and the records always stayed there? Was it like that? DJ Vibe We don’t have the records on the wall but the records stay in the club. You buy the records, if you go out, if you leave the club, the records stay in the club. Lauren Martin That’s really interesting. I didn’t know that. I learn something new all the time. DJ Vibe Plateau became very different because one of the owners, he was from Spain, he had a bar in Grenada. He brought his DJ for the opening. The music he brought, he was like Matt Bianco, kind of style. The Cure, we play more alternative pop, new wave kind of stuff. Sometimes the indies too, of course. Not the commercial side of the music the other clubs play. Lauren Martin I wonder, around this time there’s two other things happening in tandem in Europe. There’s dance music cultures developing in the UK, and that becomes big clubs like the Haçienda. But also, in Ibiza, there’s people like Alfredo who are developing the Balearic sound. Were you quite inspired by that Balearic style and sound as way of mixing quite different records together, a lot of slower records, rock records? Was that influential in what you were doing too? DJ Vibe Yes. First time I go to Ibiza was 1987. It was Alfredo playing at Pacha. He was the guy, and also the space. He used to have Jam & Spoon from Germany, which they play more the techno side. Definitely these two guys, the music they’re playing back in the days, influenced me later for the club I played at for 10 years, called Kremlin. We used to go every week to Spain, buy music as well, and every summer, fly to Ibiza, listen to what they’re playing with those Balearic sounds. Lauren Martin Did you play in Ibiza as well or were you just going as a fan? DJ Vibe More recently. Not in ’80s, I never. I played in, I think in 2001, my first gig in Ibiza. Lauren Martin We’re talking about all this like it’s the most normal thing in the world to be a DJ in the mid- to late ’80s, but I wonder what mainstream Portuguese culture thought of all this club culture stuff? In the UK there was a huge, almost like a moral panic about raves and ecstasy and acid. It was in all the newspapers, it was the end of the world. Was there something similar like that happening in Portugal? Did people pay attention to it? DJ Vibe What happened in the UK? Lauren Martin No, I mean, was there an equivalent, like, who are these people? DJ Vibe I can say we had the opposite. The police used to come to help us to do the parties [laughter]. We are able to stop at the gas station on the way to the party and get a bottle of whiskey and go to the party with the bottle of whiskey in the car. The English DJs come, [they get] very, very... That’s why they call [the parties], “A Paradise Called Portugal.” That name came because all the experience [of DJs] and journalists [who] came first time, and they say, “How come you guys can have this like this?” The police are here, say to the guy, “Come in, come in.” I knew in England it was completely the opposite, they are very tough. We get lucky with that. Lauren Martin Why do you think that was? DJ Vibe They don’t know exactly what’s happening [laughter]. I’m sure. They are like, they knew it was a music event, but that’s it. Even the mayors, they come to the parties early. See, “OK, everything’s fine, good, everybody’s dancing. Goodnight. Enjoy.” And they go. Lauren Martin Any famous politicians or people that should not have been at the rave at six in the morning? Did you ever see any? DJ Vibe I never saw the politician, but I have some politicians coming in the club I used to play, talk to me about the sound, [it] was louder, because they try to implement the law for the decibels in the clubs. Lauren Martin They were there doing their job. DJ Vibe They try. Just today I guess we have those limiters in the clubs, which, I think, is not good because dance music, it must be played louder. If you want to do that, it’s not correct, it’s not correct. Lauren Martin Tell me about this club Kremlin, which is very, very important to forming your style. If I walked in there on a Saturday night and you’re playing, how big is the club? How are people dressed? What’s the atmosphere like? DJ Vibe It was good. It was very intense, exciting and new for everyone. It was a time also for drugs, rave and to be more involved in the nightclubs. It was completely free for expression for everyone. The ones who dressed, you could dress the way you wanted, be the most crazy, you are welcome. It was a club for 600, 500 people, I guess. Big arcs in stone. It’s still open today. It was really good times. We have problems with the shadows. One day we start to close at four because the law in that time is for the clubs to be open until four, no more than that. The owners, they found a way to open and to do an afterhours thing with a bakery license. They found the license from six as a bakery so the club can [continue to] work. We had people, the barmen used to go on the dancefloor with croissants and stuff like that. Lauren Martin I could be raving and have a pastel de nata. DJ Vibe Of course [laughter]. Lauren Martin That sounds like heaven, actually. DJ Vibe Just to justify the license, the bakery license. But then you can be open until 11 and 12. This was a very crazy time. Sometimes they would receive a call from the police to say there’s a bomb inside the club, everybody has to get out. Because it was a competition, Alcântara and Kremlin. We don’t know exactly who’d make a phone call to the police to say there’s a bomb inside the club. The squad came and say, “Everybody out.” It’s four in the morning Saturday night, the peak hour of the club. Lauren Martin Was that to get people out of one club and into the other, like a competition? DJ Vibe Yeah, but Alcântara actually did it. Plateau is the same place as Kremlin. But the competition was Kremlin and Alcântara-Mar. It was different in the Alcântara, but always fighting with that. Sometimes the night was so good and you have to stop. It was funny times. Lauren Martin Apart from all the fun and the pastries, I’m really curious about the sound. We’ve talked about Spain, we’ve talked about Ibiza, London, some Chicago acid music, but you’re so well known in Portugal for creating this very particular kind of sound, as Portuguese, this deep house sound of Lisbon. If you could describe this to someone in your own way, how would you describe this Portuguese house sound that you helped develop? What’s the crucial elements of it? DJ Vibe Drums. Drums. When it start to play, the main influence is always the drums. I think that passed to America, after we [released] an Underground Sound of Lisbon track out in America, I think we’ve been an influence for the American, Manhattan sound, which is tribal music. I was playing mainly music, house and techno with a lot of drums. It was the main instrument for me. When I go to the studio, it’s programing the drums. Lauren Martin Your way of getting that sound out into the world was through Kaos Records. DJ Vibe Yes. Lauren Martin Can you tell us about the birth of Kaos Records and how you saw yourself as a label? Did you already have a sound in mind when you started the label, or was it a bit more experimental at the beginning? DJ Vibe I don’t even want to know [about having] a label. That was António Cunha who was the guy which, he passed away, he was a big influence on all different DJs [and] nightlife in Portugal. He was the first person to invite DJs from his clubs to play different clubs in the north of Portugal. That was completely new because we play in the clubs we’re used to [working in], that’s it. One day Antonio came to me and Rui [Da Silva], and asked if we want to be part of this label, if [we] wanted to do it, to put it out, to get a track. I told him, “I don’t have time for that. I don’t want to be involved in a label.” He said, “Oh, but you don’t have to do nothing. Just be your name there.” I said, “OK.” He was the one more involved, he was the one looking for new talent because he had a few people living in Porto, Paul Jays and in Coimbra. It was a group of people doing some music, but never releasing it. Antonio, he was the one, “OK, send me those DATs and we might put it out. Build a label.” It was him. I was thinking on what kind of music I want for the label because I was more a DJ, and that’s it. Lauren Martin You didn’t even think of yourself as a producer first. You were like, “I’m a DJ. Why would I get involved in this?” DJ Vibe I was [a] DJ full time, pretty much the whole week. I also used to do a radio show every weekend and I work in a record store [at] that time. I don’t have time even to produce. One day I wake up, I was in the booth playing a record. OK, I think I can do something similar [to] this, but I need a keyboard. And my boss, he brought a keyboard for the club. So I had the keyboard in the DJ booth, and I can play some sounds on the top of the tracks. And after that, I went to the studio with Rui and we started to produce music because he is the one more [nerdy] and more into the machines. Lauren Martin When you put out “So Get Up,” it managed to get across the ocean and into the hands of some people who were playing in New York. How did the “So Get Up” record get into the hands of people at the Sound Factory? Because that was a club in New York that ended up being quite important for you as a DJ, as a producer, to spread this Portuguese house sound. DJ Vibe Yeah. I was in New York a year before I recorded “So Get Up.” On that trip, I went to Sound Factory. And when I got there, I was completely... Blow my mind. Everything, the music, the DJ, the sound, everything, I was like, “What the hell is this?” The track, it became a whole experience of that night in Sound Factory, and I went with my friends, they lived there. When that record came out, I send one of them one copy, and he took that copy to Junior at the Sound Factory. Lauren Martin DJ Vibe Junior Vasquez. And he was... Next day, he was calling me to say, “Listen, I was on the line to get my coat and suddenly, the music stopped and I started to listen to your record.” Junior stopped the music for the first time, blah blah blah. And the guy was like, “Oh, really?” And the people get mad. So, Junior became... He created the buzz because it was only him [who had] the record in Manhattan, and Sound Factory in 1991, it was the club. It was the Paradise Garage for the ’90s, you know? It was the main club, he was the guy. So, he had the track when no one have it in Manhattan, and everybody was looking for the record when Junior [stopped the music]. So, when Kaos released the record, I sent a few more copies for my friend and he give one to DJs, different DJs in Manhattan. So Junior find out and give my number, because it was stamped on the label, my phone number at home. It’s the only information. No name, no nothing, just a number for my house just in case. And yeah, and it was good because it works. So a few months later, I started to receive fax from labels in America because he just give away the number and say, “If you want to know who this guy is, here.” OK. So, I started to receive a couple of offers to license, and then me and Rui and Antonio, we decide which label to release the record, and yeah. And then after that, everything is changed. Lauren Martin That record label was TRIBAL? DJ Vibe TRIBAL America, yes, TRIBAL America with Rob Di Stefano [who] became a big friend, and almost a Portuguese guy too. Lauren Martin Because the relationship between Kaos and yourselves, and TRIBAL, it wasn’t just, “Oh we like this one record from Lisbon.” DJ Vibe No. Lauren Martin It actually kind of changed a sound where you had a relationship between the deep kind of tribal house in New York, and the style of house that was getting played in Lisbon. I’d like to know a bit more about that, but there’s a record in this pile that has the Sound Factory name on it, and I thought we could listen to that as an example of this New York deep tribal sound. Lauren Martin So who’s this record by and why is it special for you? DJ Vibe Well this is a record from Angel Moraes called “Welcome to the Factory.” And Angel was the ... He’s Cuban, but he lives in New York, and first time he came to Europe, or playing in Europe, I was the guy who brought him. So Angel became [a] big fan of our scene back in those days, in the ’90s, and also [a] big fan of Portuguese beer. And he did this record which became an anthem on my sets for many years until today, I still play it. So I play a little bit. (music: Angel Moraes – “Welcome To The Factory”) Lauren Martin It’s such a... I could not stop that track before the vocal came in, but then we’d be here for another ten minutes. It’s so nice. I think that’s such a wonderful record. The more you listen to it, the more I just imagine myself on a podium at Sound Factory, which I guess is the point. I’d love to know more about not only these kinds of records, but the style of DJing that you developed over these ten, 15 years. This very deep hypnotic, smooth, kind of blends, and you did a lot of mix CDs around the Kremlin residency and the [Global] Grooves ones as well. Can you tell me more about this style of tracks and how you created this style of DJing that really suited that kind of sound? DJ Vibe Well, when I play, I like to create moments to the people who are dancing, and when you give the people hypnotic sounds and the fat rhythms, so it became more interesting for me to work that type of sound. I think the music, these instruments, and the frequencies these days, it hits you stronger than before. So I think it’s more easy with the technology today to work and play music than before. So what I try to do is, today I would just have two hours for a set, which is very short. [I would] try to tell a story during that time, yeah basically filling, depending on the time you play, where you’re playing, and that’s [how I choose records] for each gig. Lauren Martin In terms of your techniques, are you someone that enjoys having little tricks, like for example, we’re talking about really classic house and techno DJs, Larry Levan would have his tricks and style, and even someone like Ron Hardy would have... Would play live edits over his mixing and things like that, and you said that you would often play keyboards over tracks you’re playing. DJ Vibe Yeah. Lauren Martin Do you still do things like that? DJ Vibe Oh yeah, yeah. That’s the interesting... the interesting part of DJing, is not just play [the] record and let it go, you work the record. Sometimes you go back again and play the verses or chorus or whatever part of the records you want to play again. Before it was just vinyl, I used to play with four decks, but today with the computer, it’s making it easier so it gives you more ability for you to create different versions live, and also doing edits for me to play in the gigs. Lauren Martin This is kind of the emblematic sound that we just listened to there, but I’m wondering do you still like to sneak in older, like Portuguese jams, like you still have some more records here and I wonder if people are familiar with this very smooth hypnotic sound, but do you like to occasionally throw something in there that’s a bit more unusual? You’re smirking, I bet you are. Maybe there’s one in here that you could play for us that you often keep in your record bag, but… DJ Vibe The Portuguese one. Lauren Martin I feel like there’s a secret weapon coming, I don’t know which one it is. This one looks like it’s been in and out of the record bag for quite a number of years, what’s this one? DJ Vibe This is a record from Carlos Maria Trindade called TK, and I think it was the first record I heard [a sampler]... He’s working on [his] vocals with [a sampler]. So this is a track called [inaudible]. (music: unknown) Lauren Martin Now the title of that song, when you said it, I’m the only person in the room who didn’t laugh because I don’t speak Portuguese, so what does this song title mean? DJ Vibe It is a case, it’s being talking about it. So because he’s talking about the revolution, they used some samples from the revolution, the day of the revolution in Portuguese, and that’s the name of the track. Lauren Martin That’s definitely a TK track, it’s fantastic. I wonder, we’ve talked a lot about the past of Portugal, and your role within it. I’m very curious to get your thoughts on what you feel about contemporary club culture in Portugal. Just from the outside perspective, it seems like the city’s become a lot more popular for tourism, and I’m sure that’s had its knock-on effects for people that live here, and also the club culture. I wonder what you think about the state of dance music and club culture in Portugal as today, and what you maybe do to change it or improve it, things you do and don’t like, I’d love to get your perspective on that. DJ Vibe Well things today are, I think a little bit strong, not a little bit, [they are] stronger than before definitely. And there’s much more clubs, there’s a lot of parties, there’s a lot of promoters doing some parties. The things we used to do back in the ’90s, so we have Fuse and they’re doing parties every year, which is an extension of what we used to do in the castles back in the days. The only thing I guess is I see sometimes not a proper respect for the Portuguese DJs when they come on the bill. It looks like the Portuguese DJs are always the second choice and not mixing with internationals. It’s not a correct way after all these years, and we deserve a little bit more respect from those promoters to give us the right place after 20, 30 years. I think we deserve... Because without us, this thing I’m sure it [would not be] the same, and they [wouldn’t have] the parties [they have] today. Lauren Martin Right at the very beginning of our conversation, you were telling me that they never got international DJs to come play, it’s always the local residents playing at clubs. Are there things like that still happening if I wanted to go see a local Portuguese DJ play all night? Does that still happen? DJ Vibe No. I mean, yes, of course, there’s a... In Lux, there’s a resident DJs, they’re doing the whole night, yes. But I think that’s the only place. Lux is one place, apart of everything else. Lauren Martin I wonder, and not everyone wants to think of themselves as having a legacy necessarily, but I wonder if you see your influence in other DJs and in the club culture still. Do you see that anywhere when you go out? DJ Vibe Yeah, some things I can feel it was because I passed by, or something, yeah. And even some DJs, they’ve really… Send me music, send me [messages], ask me about this production, what I feel, because they are, they are really big fans of me and they try to do what I’ve been doing, and they want my opinion. So I can hear sometimes in the production, some of the records that come out, it was some influence by me. The same as me with the other DJs, it’s normal, it’s a cycle all the time. Lauren Martin Is there anyone in Lisbon, or just more widely across Portugal that you’re excited about as a new DJ, as a new producer? DJ Vibe Well, I can talk about this guy now, he’s everywhere. Everybody knows Luis Moullinex, the last revelation about our scene, the way he’s doing the scene and the production and the music and the band. Yeah, it was for me, the big revelation for the past five years. Lauren Martin Just as you were a revelation for someone over the years, again and again, it’s all, as you say, a full circle thing. I wanted to open up to questions for people, but first before we do that, I want to say thank you so much for sharing your stories and your music. DJ Vibe My pleasure, thank you very much. [applause] Lauren Martin Yeah, would anybody like to ask a question? audience member We were talking about the past, let’s talk about the future. What do you think about the artificial intelligence and robots? Do you think that robots will substitute the DJ? DJ Vibe No. I heard that the first time, more than 25 years ago, we use to talk about that, if that [would happen] already. And you can see technology, but you can see who can take your place. You’re never going to see a robot unless for an event but a regular robot to play in the club I don’t think so, I don’t think so. And if that happens, it’s bad. I think that’s going to kill the whole thing, and that’s not very possible. Lauren Martin Well if anyone’s shy, you could always just ask us afterwards, it’s fine. But again, thank you so much for coming this afternoon, and a massive thank you to DJ Vibe. DJ Vibe Thank you. [applause]

---

Title: Bhavishyavani Future Soundz
Date: 2019-09-30
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/bhavishyavani-future-soundz/

Bhavishyavani Future Soundz
As electronic dance music and rave culture washed over America and England in the ’90s, India still moved to a more traditional nightlife beat that included Goa trance and chart-approved hits. Indian nightlife began to change at the turn of the century when small groups of artists and creatives across the country found ways to showcase the music and aesthetics they’d witnessed abroad. In Mumbai, it was the Bhavishyavani Future Soundz collective who helped kickstart the evolution of the city’s club culture. A multimedia collective composed of amateur DJs, film and design professionals, Bhavishyavani Future Soundz threw their first party on May 13, 1999. Over the years visual themes like traditional Indian weddings or politics would mix with sets of jungle, dub techno and live performances by then-upcoming Indian electronic acts such as MIDIval Punditz. By combining a love of their hometown and culture with graphic design, music and live performance, this disparate group of idealists showed how a strong visual identity could define a scene and injected a sense of fun and possibility into Mumbai nightlife that is still felt to this day.
In this public conversation held at Mumbai’s Famous Studios, three of the Bhavishyavani Future Soundz founders – Ashim Ahluwalia, Mukul Deora and Tejas Mangeshkar – shared stories of how they mixed foreign and local inspirations together, and the uphill battles of trying to establish a new culture of nightlife in a country undergoing its own cultural and demographic explosion.
Hosted by Kenneth Lobo Good evening everyone and welcome to Famous Studios in Mumbai. Bhavishyavani Future Soundz is one of India’s legendary electronic music and mixed media art collectives. From 1999 they’ve hosted several of Mumbai’s most memorable party nights. Each party has also featured artwork and production that has a uniquely Bhavishyavani take on it. They pioneered flyer culture, immersive club experiences, guest bookings and collaborations much before they became commonplace in India. There’s the iconic Bha logo, the Bhavishyavani robots, the Bhavishyavani bookings, but above all else, it’s always been about the Bhavishyavani party. Please welcome Ashim Ahluwalia, Mukul Deora, Tejas Mangeshkar from the Bhavishyavani Crew. Give it up. [applause] Tejas Mangeshkar Hi! Kenneth Lobo So the ’90s in India, to jog the memory a little bit, maybe for those who weren’t around. The economy had liberalized. We’d moved towards a more service oriented market, taking baby steps toward private and foreign investment. It was the start of the growth of the Indian middle class in the ’90s. In cricket, Mohammed Azharuddin was leading the cricket team. Sachin Tendulkar played his famous desert storm innings against the Australians in Sharjah. In Bollywood, the studios which used to record all of these amazing soundtracks with 30-piece orchestras, in studios like this one that we’re sitting in, shut down. They were replaced by synthesizers and drum machines. It was possibly the worst period of music in the Hindi film industry, with AR Rahman being the exception to the rule, as always. I want to ask each of you, can you give me a memory of Bombay from the ’90s? Ashim Ahluwalia Yeah. It was kind of a cultural wasteland to be really honest. It was like nothing going on. It was pretty much “Summer of ’69” playing in every bar and every night club. You know, you had greatest hits, top 40 kind of stuff or Bollywood songs. There was no scene. There was no club culture. There was nothing really. The only sort of alternative electronic music was trance, Goa trance. There really wasn’t many options for us. I think that’s how we probably got together. Mukul Deora Yeah. You were saying you went to a night club and heard “Summer of ’69,” ’90s stuff and you’re getting high as the night is going on and feeling a little good about your life and then “Summer of ’69” comes on again. Three times in a row, and we hated that song actually. Or you had dance bars that would play Bollywood music which was not our thing. You can’t really get deep into that space. For us, we wanted a change. We wanted to see what we had experienced when we were abroad basically. Kenneth Lobo Tejas? Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah. In the ’90s I remember more like going to rock shows called Independence Rock, where we used to go behind the venue in the shady bars and have some rum and coke. Then jump the wall and get in. And some of us that used to jump the wall then became Pentagram [the Indian indie-electronic band] again later and stuff like that. I remember that rock was quite big at that point. Kenneth Lobo What was Independence Rock? Tejas Mangeshkar Independence Rock was this, Farhad Wadia, this guy who used to create once a year big concert for two days or something, with all the Metallica, all these guys. But played by the locals. Mukul Deora At Rang Bhavan [open air venue that hosted most of the rock gigs], no? Tejas Mangeshkar At Rang Bhavan yes. Rang Bhavan days, correct. But all the albums played by locals, you know bands like Agnee and Pin Drop Violence, or… Ashim Ahluwalia Actually the heavy metal scene was the indie scene. It was the alternative scene. Mukul Deora That’s true, it was. Kenneth Lobo Mukul, you had just come back from London. What was your experience there like? Mukul Deora I was in London from ’93 to ’96. I consider myself very lucky during that period because you had the explosion of indie rock which was Radiohead, Oasis, Blur, you had the whole Bristol sound which was, Massive Attack, Portishead, Tricky, Roni Size. You had for me the whole electronic music explosion Underworld, Orbital, drum & bass, Goldie, all these things happened in that period when I was in university. I just used to go to clubs, and they would just blow my mind, the music, the flyers, I used to collect hundreds of flyers. They just give them out to you when you come out of a club. The way they did up the clubs as well, it was an immersive experience. It was sound, visuals, light, a community of people not so different. People from everywhere coming and losing themselves to dance which is, I think, what we wanted to do. Which we missed a lot when we came back, and we wanted to replicate that kind of thing and introduce new sounds to everyone in India. Kenneth Lobo Is there a particular sort of experience that you remember, that stayed with you? Mukul Deora Out there. I mean, yeah, there were many experiences. I used to go to Brixton Academy a lot which is this amazing music venue in Brixton [South London]. It’s not a club. It’s a music venue. I saw Orbital, Underworld, the Aphex Twin, all these guys playing out there. Just amazing. Just the music, the conversations with people. There was actually a place called Megatripolis which was a nightclub, an underground nightclub under the arches in this area near the river. It was a gay nightclub during the week called Heaven, and on Thursday nights it was called Megatripolis and it used to be taken over by techno. In those days, it was just electronic art techno. There was no trance and drum & bass. It was just analog instruments making techno music, and you had this area with all these guys selling things and different rooms with different guys playing things. That kind of stuff. Trippy visuals, I’d never seen trippy visuals before. Yeah, that kind of stuff. Kenneth Lobo Ashim you had just returned from New York. What was your experience in New York like because that was also a particular moment in time, ’90s when New York was also transforming. Ashim Ahluwalia Actually, the funny thing is that when I went to film school, art school in New York between ’91 and ’95, and I stayed on until almost the end of ’96, those years, actually, in the US the electronic music scene was very depressing. Actually, there was no scene as such, it was pretty much, everyone listening to Nirvana. It was a kind of grunge moment. My introduction actually, I have a single image. I don’t know if we can... Maybe you can edit it out. First memories I had was actually going to visit a friend of mine in Holland in ’92 which was when that rave moment was really happening. Actually, what Mukul’s saying is it wasn’t even called techno, it was just called rave. There was no word for this sound, right? There was no word. There was no star DJs. I remember dropping some Es actually, and going to this thing with a flyer. I had no idea what it was. I never heard this sound, so you can imagine, my only exposure had been analog, acoustic, electric instruments, band stuff. We wandered in. We walked through a forest, and we got our… This was pre, we’re talking, pre-internet, pre-mobile phone, map and flyer. Then you’re in the forest, and you’re tripping your head off. At some point, we saw a tent lit up. We went into this tent, and it was about maybe 200, 300 people inside the tent bouncing on this bouncy floor. Everyone was tripping, and there was this amazing music which I’d never heard in my life. That was my first introduction to sort of a rave. Those days, a rave was taken very seriously. It was people who came with glow sticks and they dressed up. It was actually a very... There was a whole culture around raving. Before you had breakbeat, before you had techno, before you had everything, you just had rave music. That was kind of my initial openings to this thing. Of course, vinyl. Seeing people play records again. I hadn’t seen that since I was a kid, so this idea that you had white label vinyl, you didn’t know who the artist was. These were 12”, they were cut only for that night. That kind of blew my mind, I think. Kenneth Lobo Tejas, you were here. What was going on in Bombay? Tejas Mangeshkar After the rock days, we were kind of... In Bombay actually what was going on was kind of interesting. There was no such kind of traffic [as there is today], OK? What we used to do in Shivaji Park, we used to hitchhike rides from random guys, and reach say town to J.J. School of Arts or... This was kind of the easy life in Bombay. My partner at that time, Kurnal who is here, so we thought of having the first... Doing a party called Hitchhike the Ride. We had this party organized in Juhu at a place called Ruia House. I remember Kurnal doing the flyer which was called Hitchhike the Ride. The idea was don’t come by taxi or train or anything, but you have to hitchhike to come to the ride by any random person, and you can invite that person also to the party. That is the first party actually that we have done in the J.J. days. Kenneth Lobo People would actually stop for you while you hitchhiked? Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Regularly. Maybe three times a day also. What say, Kurnal? Kenneth Lobo There was this... You were organizing this party? Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah, yeah, yeah. Kenneth Lobo What was happening with the clubs? Tejas Mangeshkar What was happening with the clubs is there was this friend of ours Sachin Jamney who actually did the Gandhi flyer. The Gandhi with the headphones. Sachin Jamney told us once, “Let’s go to Aarey Mik Colony there’s a dance bar which has opened, so we have to check it out.” We thought, “Let’s go and find what’s happening there.” We go to Aarey Mik Colony and between all the lush meadows and all that there’s one dance bar, standalone. We go there, and me and Kurnal specially I remember, we just start looking at the DJ console, and there’s this guy, a big bouncer with long hair, mixing on cassette deck… Tapes. He was playing a track, a Bollywood jhankaar beat with the coins rumbling in the speaker, he used to play that and exactly at the time of the mix, he used to put the other cassette on. Just kind of fascinated at that time. What is this DJ mix kind of on cassettes? We thought that there is already a chance to do some club kind of party before we ever meet these guys [points to the other two on the couch]. These are our initial ideas of throwing parties by getting these tapes from some friends, and doing it at these J.J. School of Arts, for that crowd from J.J. School of Arts parties in Ruia House, which is in Juhu. Kenneth Lobo For the audience that doesn’t know, can one of you describe what a dance bar is, please? Mukul Deora It’s legal now. I think it was illegal for 10 years, and now it’s legal. A dance bar is a very interesting thing which I think comes from the repressive society that is India in some parts. It’s a... I’m thinking somehow of a wide tile place with a fake Taj Mahal interior, and you have these women wearing sarees, young girls not women, girls 18 to 25, dancing to Bollywood songs on a dance floor and around the... It’d be a wide marble dance floor. Usually around the dance floor will be men, middle-aged men. 99 percent of them will have mustaches, I think. Sitting around eating chicken tikka and having beer or whiskey, and watching these girls dance. Every once in a while a guy will just jump up with a wad of money, and [makes sound] chuck the money like a shower of notes on one lucky or unlucky girl’s head. And then maybe he can talk to her and… Garlands of money. Tejas Mangeshkar Garlands of hundred Rupee notes. Mukul Deora Then they talk maybe afterwards depending on the managers, the deal that happens, and that’s what it is basically. Kenneth Lobo There were dance bars… Mukul Deora It’s a very important part of Indian culture for... I mean, in that, for men to go out at night. It’s like a strip bar in America, I guess. It’s that kind of thing. Ashim Ahluwalia It’s also really important, I think, also to Bhavishyavani in a weird way because I think it was sort of... In a way, the only reference we had of a sort of pseudo-illegal place where fun stuff happens. Mukul Deora Right. Ashim Ahluwalia Kind of because everything else was very formal. You had to wear black shoes and a black belt to enter a nightclub, you know what I mean? It was very British. Almost like going to a proper dinner or something. The nightclub was a very formal event, whereas a dance bar you have guys with open shirts, gold, more our scene if you know what I mean. Mukul Deora Yeah. Kenneth Lobo What about this kind of music appealed to you all? Ashim Ahluwalia Firstly, I think the discovery of jungle and drum & bass. I mean, it wasn’t even called drum & bass, it was really jungle at that moment, and it sounds so slow now when we hear it. It’s amazing. Mukul Deora It sounds really slow. Ashim Ahluwalia It sounds like hip-hop now. It’s really funny because it sounded so fast when we heard it the first time and very futuristic. I still think it has a very futuristic sound and that’s ’96. That’s what, almost 20 something, more than 20 years old. I think what we really loved, what I loved and I can kind of speak for the others, is that there was something very Indian, very Desi about the grooves. It’s a lot of low end, and it’s a very dhol type sound. It has a very loose structure. It’s not very Germanic. It’s not very European in terms of its 4/4. It comes from, obviously, Jamaican dub culture, so it’s got a dub, like broken kind of looser vibe. That’s kind of, I think, where we connected because also Tejas used to play tabla, we had a very synergistic idea of dhol. We used to play a lot of dhol alongside and lock them to these grooves during our sets. There was a lot of this kind of Indian aesthetic that we really wanted to bring into it, and jungle just fit that I think. Mukul Deora I think jazz also because jungle is a lot of jazz, funk samples. It was inner city stuff, that urban, very open, very inner city which was what we associated with as well coming from Mumbai, the most open place ever. I think that was important for us. Even today, when you hear drum & bass and you’re driving in a car, and those days we used to go for long drives, it just, the scenery of the city just fits with the music. It’s a perfect soundtrack, even now. I think that was very important for us also. I think that’s why we like visuals as well, and we’re one of the first people to do that. To try and get projectors or some kind of visual element because it’s nice to see something while you’re dancing and while you’re hearing this music. It’s like a soundtrack basically. Tejas Mangeshkar We kind of connected on the music they were playing. I think it was... As a kid I used to dance in the processions of the Ganapati festival. Used to go down my building and there would have been live drummers and all that bling. We had these kinds of moves, me and my friends as kids, and when these guys are playing this kind of drum & bass, kind of fast stuff, it was kind of the same moves being applied to this dancefloor. It was kind of... Kenneth Lobo To come back to what you all said earlier, Mukul and Ashim about coming back to this wasteland, how did the idea for Bhavishyavani Future Soundz come about? Mukul Deora I mean, one thing I think for us, I mean for me when I came back, I landed in… Wasteland is such a big word but I felt so isolated out here because, “How do I meet someone interesting?” I mean, for me music was such an important part of my identity, so when I did meet new people I would ask them, “Do you like this or do you like that? Or do you like Massive Attack?” for example. Everybody said no. I was just, like, “What can I talk to someone about? I can’t talk to them about anything really.” That was a problem. How do you meet people like yourself? How do you live? What do you do? I think, for me that was a very important thing. Ashim Ahluwalia I actually chose to move back from New York because I grew up in Bombay. I chose to move back. It was kind of funny because I wanted to actually reconnect with this city, but nobody else seemed to be that interested in the city itself. I love the city. I love everything about it. It’s only when we started meeting, I think, we all started realizing we had a common love for this city. We really liked things that many people just take for granted. We can talk about a Ganapati procession, but that’s one of the most amazing soundsystem parties, if you think about it. It’s incredible. It’s like being in Kingston in 1950. You’ve got massive bass bins, and you’ve got people playing dhol live on top of that and a DJ. I mean, it doesn’t get better than that. There was already so many things in the city that was so incredible, but somehow everybody that I met, other than Mukul maybe or very few people, who had returned from abroad had this thing of like, “Oh you know Bombay’s not happening. I’d rather be in London. I’d rather be in New York. I’d rather be…” I found that really annoying. I was like, “This is just ridiculous.” You have so much here, but there’s just no way for people who didn’t want to tap that. I think, what happened is it just was very organic the way we just met. They had already started doing parties in some shape or form. They were networked, Grandmother, that’s Tejas and Kurnal. Mukul had a whole bunch of records. My cousin Justy [Jatin Vidyarthi] who’s from Chennai, but he had studied in Australia came back with a bunch of jungle records. It was just the right moment. It was never planned. Kenneth Lobo Tejas, can you tell us about the Bhavishyavani moment? Tejas Mangeshkar Yes, so I think it was, as Ashim says, we all kind of met with the common friends around us who were either in film making or design or this kind of thing. Somehow we used to meet in Mahim at this place where we used to eat surmai fry, so if you see one of the flyers, you’ll see a surmai on it. This is how we kind of connected over local food and music. These were the two, I think, things which made Bhavishyavani happen. The sound and the food. Mukul Deora Industrial Bombay. I mean, when Ashim said this it made me remember like the robots, why did we get the robots? Because we live in South Bombay, so I saw them at our chowpatty beach, but they saw them at their chowpatty beach. So these quintessentially Bombay slash Indian innovations, almost in a way, which is part of our fabric. But you know you have to get into it in some way, otherwise it’s like, “It’s all sh-t, this is all sh-t.” How do you get into it, how do you get into the sounds, the culture, the local culture? But use that, and connect to it in a way, otherwise what does a local culture mean? Someone thinks it’s Bollywood music, for example. For us it’s not that. That is another mediated form of local culture being put to us, which we don’t accept. This was another way for us to connect again. I mean, a lot of the gigs, we love doing gigs, and these dance bar-esque places, because we would get locals from anywhere coming there and doing anything, you know. Just blowing their mind with this dhol kind of music, not even knowing what it is, but it makes them move, basically. Tejas Mangeshkar Like some parties, the locals were more than our crowd. Mukul Deora Oh much more. Kenneth Lobo Tejas, can you recount the moment of Bhavishyavani at Juhu chowpatty? Tejas Mangeshkar I remember, me and Kurnal, we were walking and we used to have this guy called Sagar, and this Sagar guy, we used to call him Sagar hain kya Sagar, and we had to find him because he had the connections with this doctor called Hoffman. So, me and Kurnal used to go and find this guy, and you know, tried to find this, and at one such point we went and met Sagar, and we were on sagar kinare [sagar means sea and the dealer’s name was also Sagar. In this case sagar kinare means by the sea], with the robots, so we said, “Let’s go and check it out.” So that guy said, “Give me ten Rupees.” So me and Kurnal said, “OK, let’s give.” So he gave us… There are two headphones on each robot, so he gives us the thing. The robot to me said, “You will have a boy.” And to Kurnal said something else. So then both of us we were just like looking at each other, we come back to our thing. And no, we ask him, “Boss, what is this thing called?” We call everyone boss like the rickshaw driver, the grocery store guy, the ice cream vendor, and he said, “Bhavishyavani.” So we come back to the office and Kurnal’s tripping on the dreams of Hoffman, uncle Hoffman and all that. And next morning we wake up and he says, “Tee [Tejas], what about Bhavishyavani?” So I said, “What do you mean?” So he said, “No, Bhavishyavani Future Sound.” So I’m like, “It sounds good, for what?” So he’s like, “For the company name.” So I’m like, “OK. Sounds good. And what about the logo?” He said, “The VIP suitcase and the robot on top.” So then we were like excited, next evening, straight to Ashim’s office, Film Republic, idea sealed, everyone excited. Now we have had the name, now where do we do the party? Then it was like the next, that was the, the beginning… Kenneth Lobo You also had some amazing tag lines, “We don’t build spaceships, we are spaceships,” and, “Fast dancing for a new India.” Who came up with those? Tejas Mangeshkar Fast dancing for a new India was Ashim, because what happened at that point is we were kind of doing these sessions in our office in Mahim, and some of the tracks, we were wondering how the guys might dance, like how do we make them fast dance to the music? Because before that it was like jive or swive or, whatever it’s called. So then, then Ashim was like, “Man it should be like fast dancing for a new India.” So that was the initial one, in the beginning only it had come, but then as we are a crew, and we got more and more people, we got this amazing film maker also, like a junior from his college in the US called Kulkarni Vishwas @ hotmail.com. So he came up with the thing and he said, “You guys don’t build spaceships, you are spaceships.” So we were like, OK so then we… Mukul Deora And he wrote it down for some article. There was some article he wrote. Tejas Mangeshkar I think for the first website. Mukul Deora Yeah, yeah. For the first website. He was a copy guy. Kenneth Lobo Tell us about the first Bhavishyavani Future Soundz party. Can we have the image up from the first, the flyer from the first party please? Tejas Mangeshkar So to continue from the logo design, which Kurnal made, the Bha, and if you see, that time the Bha was not the logo, which nowadays people call the monogram or something. Our logo was a robot with the VIP suitcase and the two headphones. So that was actually the logo. So the logo there and then your information. And here what happened was, we got supported by Sony Music, support in the sense that we straight told them that we need 50,000 Rupees to do the décor. And we need the robots and so they kind of helped us. And there’s United Printers and Processors who… Some of the guys are coming this evening for the party as well. So it was at Razz, and it was 13th May, which is two days from now, in ’99. And so it was quite amazing the first party, because we didn’t expect this kind of crowd to show up, actually show up. Because what we did is we had printed about 500 of these, and we had these brown envelopes, which you get at the Kirana shop [grocery store], they put that... So we made all these brown envelopes and put all these flyers in and we just sent it to, say like a Channel V office [one of India’s first youth culture & music channels along with MTV] or an MTV office, or Elle Magazine, some friends were there, or these ad agencies like Lowe Lintas and all that. Whoever our friends used to work for or were interning or something like that, so we just send 50 flyers, and for that party, I remember, it was like a packed crowd of all colorful kind of looking people. Kenneth Lobo Can you describe the club? Tejas Mangeshkar So the club format was basically, this was the stage, and both sides on the right and the left were like these kind of balconies I think, for the VIP guys to stand. And the center was the dancefloor. So there was Razz Rhino in ’99. Kenneth Lobo Razzberry Rhinoceros? Tejas Mangeshkar Yes that’s right. And there was a very special act that day, apart from the DJs of course, this was the first INSAT, that time it was INSAT 2A and 2B, Masta Justy was not named. So we just put the, you know the satellite which, the first Indian satellite which went up? In south India or something, they fired it up. And so it’s called INSAT, and in half an hour it came down again and crashed, poor thing. And then they put the INSAT 2B and same thing happened, so we thought that they are like this low-tech, low-orbit kind of DJs, no? So we had put them. And then the third guy was this film maker, who we all were, I mean we were in love with this film called Om Dar Ba Dar [India’s first avant-garde film, released in 1988]. And his name is Kamal Swaroop, he’s going to join us tonight at the party also. And he was basically MCing, kind of MCing during our party, but he was like the Krishna bhagwan, lying down like that with the thing. And he was MCing like mad stuff all from his scripts or some stuff while rhyming. And one example was, what he said was, “Busy, busy, busy, I’m a business man.” And… Kenneth Lobo And he was MCing to drum & bass and jungle and… Ashim Ahluwalia Yeah, yeah. Yeah which he had heard for the first time that night. So it was that kind of vibe if you know what I mean. It was very strange, because I think a lot of people didn’t know what that sound was, but there was a kind of openness and obviously there were a lot of substances, so that also helped. But the fact that people hadn’t heard this sound, but they just did their own thing with it, I think that was pretty incredible. So that definitely, for us it was an experiment, and it was like, “OK, we need to do this like regularly now.” Tejas Mangeshkar It was like a kind of a hit, because then there was a, we had a register book outside. So suddenly we had everyone’s numbers and hotmail addresses and all, which was quite good. It helped us for the other parties to keep that logbook. Kenneth Lobo And Ashim you stitched together some visuals for this gig? Ashim Ahluwalia Yeah I had a VHS tape of like films division, like some news reels that had just type, actually a lot like the text that we ended up using a lot, because Kurnal was really into type, he loved type, because he’s a type designer, and I think we also learned the love of type from him. Especially kind of this Bombay type, which we forget about. Like every taxi has a hand cut type face, every shop has a hand cut type face and Bhavishyavani’s a lot about the type. You see every flyer has different type faces. So I just had a video like which was running old 16mm films of like types, type faces. It was quite a beautiful party I have to say, it was something quite special. Kenneth Lobo Since we’re at Kurnal, maybe you can tell us just a little bit about Grandmother? Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah so Kurnal and me basically we were doing parties before we met them. Together we were doing some freelance graphic design work, some 3D animation stuff for clients, through J.J. and all that. And at that time we were sweetly offered by my grand mom, her balcony space in Shivaji Park to start our office. The first client was Sony Music, that’s why they’re also in the first poster. So Sony Music was our first client and that’s how we started, and Kurnal, and we had one more partner at that time called Vinod Nair, who was a photographer. And he was basically covering all our, he also did some flyer designs and also we three started Grandmother, and we were doing all this kind of design for the youth you can say. At that time they used to call us, “Call Grandmother, they’ll do youth design.” And then we had a client even Mukul knows, Mukul was a copywriter at that time, and we got a client called Youth Planet. So they wanted us to do the whole design of Youth Planet. Kenneth Lobo Speaking of Shivaji Park, you’ve spoken in the past about you all having this sort of Shivaji Park crew at the time. Tejas Mangeshkar So earlier it was the rock crew, which was all the rock bands of Bombay at that time, they all used to hang in Shivaji Park. There was a khatta [a country bar]. And there was also a guy called Kiran Toraskar, who was like the master recorder of CDs onto cassettes. So he was basically, we all used to meet there and then come and sit in Shivaji Park, and then later on, I don’t know how all of these guys also started in Shivaji Park, also we had an office, before Grandmother, we had an office next to Lilavati Hospital in Bandra it was called Alvares House. And there one other friend Andy, who helped us get these automats was staying. And Vishal Rawley who was working with Ashim at that time was staying with him. So this is kind of how we all met, and then we started hanging in Shivaji Park because all the best food was there. All these local things, our ideas were there. And it was an escape from like 1900s, [a bar at the Taj Mahal hotel which featured a Richard Long soundsystem] all this kind of stuff. This was like, kind of the cool area to hangout, it was like the Bandra [current hipster area in Mumbai] of that time. Kenneth Lobo So right from the get go, you all were a mixed media arts collective. Can we maybe run through three of the parties that you all organized. If we can have the flyer, actually the photograph that we have from the wedding theme party, maybe Ashim you can talk us through this one and tell us what’s going on here. Ashim Ahluwalia That’s actually quite a rare photograph, because funnily enough, even though we were doing all of this stuff, we were very bad at documentation. So there is almost no photographs, very little stuff, actually. So this is quite a rare photograph of one of the parties. These guys were always upping the stakes. And it was good, because we would have a conversation, and then Kurnal or Tejas would say, “How about we get a Shaadi [wedding] decorator to do it?” All right, “Ah, OK? So then we gonna play these tunes.” So it would just become, it would just be sort of a joke, it would start as a joke and then it would actually become a real thing, kind of like Bhavishyavani, like it was sort of like, “Are we doing this seriously or not?” And then 20 years later here we are and we’re like sitting in a panel discussion. It was never meant to be this way, right? But yeah that was the vibe of the party, a lot of jungle. We had a tabla there on the floor, I don’t know who that was, I don’t even remember much of this party. There’s also Guido there. So very earlier on, we already had a lot of different genres going on at the party, he used to play a lot of Basic Channel type stuff. So whether it was techno, jungle, whatever, we would play really leftfield stuff. I mean probably more so than we can play today, because now there’s a sort of club culture. So people are kind of expecting a certain sound. I think there, because we had no expectation, I mean if Mukul wanted to play an Autechre track, or I wanted to play like a strange kind of left wing, Rephlex records, something really weird, people would just be open to it, and there’d be a tabla guy playing on top of it, and you just switch to a Basic Channel set, and suddenly he’s playing like a Berlin set. What was kind of common at these parties was the emphasis on bass, on the low end. So whether it was techno, whether it was jungle, or whatever it was, it was always very low end, and very heavy. So that’s what I remember. Mukul Deora I mean on the bass, when the music system used to work, I remember very often the speaker just would stop working, the mixer was always a problem, the Gemini mixers. Ashim Ahluwalia Things would stop, but what was nice is that the party wouldn’t stop kind of. It would be like 20 minutes and someone’s trying to figure out what’s blown. And everyone’s still there, no one’s leaving, it’s just more people coming in, it was one of those. Mukul Deora There was no mobile phones, there was nowhere for anyone to go. Kenneth Lobo What was the wedding theme? Mukul Deora It was Tejas getting married. As you can see. Tejas Mangeshkar To the decks. Yeah, so Shaadi was basically, we used to go for long drives during that time at night after meeting Sagar and all that. And we also used to come back to Mahim, from town usually near the docks. And we used to pass these flower markets, Dadar [neighbourhood in Mumbai] flower markets. And we were always fascinated in the morning to see all these colors outside, and so we said, “Why don’t we ask one of these flower decorators to come and do the design for the thing?” So Shaadi was one, but more interesting for me is the next one after this, we don’t have the picture, it was called the Neta [or politician] party. So the flyer was Gandhi and Shilpa… Little Shilpa [India’s most famous milliner and Tejas’s wife] had made these blue kurtas with pockets on the outside with the Bha logo. So they were from actually Matunga market, they were lungis but with the wide thread. So everyone had a different kurta because the white, the white line was coming in different sizes, just by the cutting. And there the décor was basically, we had put up frames of Bhagat Singh [an Indian freedom fighter] around and all with the thing around. All the prints were there nicely. And then when the audience enters, Shilpa also found this guy called Karim on Mahim, and he used to make these cycles out of wires. So everyone got a free Gandhi spec, like a thing which you wear and then you come inside the party. Otherwise, if you’re not wearing it, sorry… Kind of like hitchhike the ride, if you don’t hitchhike, don’t come. Kenneth Lobo Nice. Mukul can you tell us about the… Mukul Deora It was that same party at hotel airport, the second party? Tejas Mangeshkar That’s Scream, which was the automats. Mukul Deora But that was the second one? Wasn’t that the second one? Tejas Mangeshkar That was the second one but this one was third as well. Mukul Deora The third one right, right, right. It’s so confusing… Tejas Mangeshkar But I want you to tell about the Scream, Scream party, which is basically when one guy came and put the CD and we had to stop it, the whole crowd had stopped. Mukul Deora I mean, yeah the second party was one we had at this hotel airport. It was… Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah they made an illustration of that. Mukul Deora Yeah the one they made a comic of. There was a small hotel behind the domestic airport, Tejas and me used to mostly drive around all the time and… Tejas Mangeshkar Just looking at, meeting people. Mukul Deora Yeah and just find a nightclub, we’d just be driving on the road in Bandra or Khar and there would be some sign that there’s a nightclub like, what is the name of the nightclub? Scream and we would go inside and meet the manager, some guy with a suit and just say that we are these guys that want to make music. Mostly they would tell us to f-ck off or whatever, but… Tejas Mangeshkar No they should go with the letter also, you know like… Like a presentation… Mukul Deora Yeah, yeah like a proposal, basically. Tejas Mangeshkar Proposal, always a proposal. Mukul Deora You earn a lot of money, we’ll get a good cream crowd for you. That kind of stuff. Kenneth Lobo Can you take us through what a typical conversation with a club owner would be like? Mukul Deora Well the legendary one is that one, a gangster basically, a South Indian gangster we met, he had a small nightclub next to a restaurant in Bandra. We met him and he said… Tejas Mangeshkar Western Café. Mukul Deora Yeah I didn’t want to say the name but X, Y, Z. And he said, “I want only cream crowd.” And we didn’t understand what he meant in the beginning. At least one of us didn’t understand, but then we understood. And we said, “No, no don’t worry, it’s only cream crowd. Very good people.” And we showed him newspaper cuttings or something like that, and he was like, “No stags on the dance floor. No chappals [open footwear].” And there was a few more things like that. And this is a very good example of what Ashim was saying before what it was in Bombay before. If you’re a single guy, or you’re two guys actually, because you couldn’t get into a night club in these typical old school nightclubs that were there. Because it was about a girl and a guy going on a date and dancing to commercial music. So you couldn’t get into a nightclub, you had dress code, you couldn’t wear chappals, for example, no stags on the dance floor. It’s insane I mean. And we’re used to like, you’re dancing by yourself most of the time, you’re not dancing with a partner to electronic music. I mean if you think about it, it’s so crazy, no? Ashim Ahluwalia That could be the future, though. Mukul Deora It could be the future, yeah. Actually it sounds so crazy the whole thing, but so we used to always tell them that for us it was very important that the door, and taking over the whole place. It was our thing then it was very important for us that the guy had to understand, this is our gig. You have the place but chill out. The cost of it for us, it was very important that we charge as little as possible so no one, we didn’t want anyone to come and say, “We couldn’t get in,” or, “We couldn’t afford a beer.” It was very important for us to have all these things clear. Guys can’t be turned down, chappals, no discrimination in anyway. If you come to hear music, you can come and hear your music. Which wasn’t easy, because those guys they don’t understand what you’re saying half the time, and they would say yes in the beginning. And then change it. And in those days you used to also have the house DJ, I think that’s what Tejas wanted to talk about. So in all these nightclubs you’d have the house DJ who hated us, for some reason, because we were playing and people were loving our music, and those poor guys had to play “Summer of ’69” again, they had to play requests. Forget all these things, but it was request culture in those days. The poor guy was, they had him on a salary playing whatever, “Mereko yeh khelney ka hain,” [Bombay slang for I want this to be played] or whatever and they would have to play that. Tejas Mangeshkar And poor guy never used to get a crowd, and when he used to see our parties, he was like, “Boss I want to play.” Between our sets. Mukul Deora Exactly, so for the second gig, suddenly in the middle, I think Justy was playing then, I played and then suddenly we heard “Happy Birthday” or what was it? Tejas Mangeshkar No, it was a trance track some guy came. Mukul Deora No, that was someone else, but no... [laughs] But the DJ also played “Happy Birthday.” He played “Happy Birthday” because it was his girlfriend’s birthday. Kenneth Lobo Sorry, he played “Happy Birthday” in the middle of? Ashim Ahluwalia Yes, you’d cut a set, you’d cut a heavy jungle track and suddenly there would be “Happy Birthday” playing. Mukul Deora And it’s my girlfriend’s birthday. Ashim Ahluwalia And there would be a request or it would be... “Can someone move their car?” So it was a strange thing where we had an underground party and then parallel to it there’s a resident DJ doing the resident DJ number, you know? Mukul Deora And we had to fight all the time. Kenneth Lobo What was your relationship with the police like then? Mukul Deora We didn’t have much of a relationship but… Tejas Mangeshkar It was always very good. They wouldn’t give us a problem. Ashim Ahluwalia Except when I got taken to the police station. Tejas Mangeshkar That was a wrong tip off. There was one incident in Madness where they thought it was a dance bar because there were too many girls entering or something in the party and I think they were supposed to raid a dance bar in Khar, east but the police van came to Madness because they saw girls so they must have thought it was a dance bar. So they came inside. Mukul Deora I was DJing at the time. I was standing in the booth and I remember clearly I turned to my right and there was a hawaldar [a beat cop] with a thing saying something, shouting something and I was telling him that for me my CDs were my life. They were everything because you’ve travelled all over the world and found each CD. So I just picked up my CDs and I ran and I’m fast, I think I ran out in two minutes and some of my friends followed me. And it was raining at that time. And some people fell over the wall, Panthaki and all fell over the wall, and so half of us got out, in this rain, you’re running with the CDs and it’s wet and mucky and everything and half of us didn’t get out. They got, not arrested but detained and taken into the station. Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah, they’re just next to it, like two blocks away… Mukul Deora It’s all very chilled, that’s the funny part… Tejas Mangeshkar They were super chill. Mukul Deora We were in high spirits, we were relaxed, we’re talking on the phone I remember I was talking to Ashim we were in my car outside the station, talking to them on the phone and… Tejas Mangeshkar They were like a raid... The main cop said, “Who did you get?” Basically the cops were meant to raid a dance bar but they raided the wrong party. Mukul Deora They were inside for about two hours and one of them was telling me that it’s really dark because they’re asking your religion. You have to sign something. I remember clearly someone was, “Why are they asking us our religion?” All that stuff, but they’re just hanging and then the main cop… Tejas Mangeshkar But there was a nice thing which happened during the thing when he got his CDs. Guido didn’t have enough time to pick up his vinyl cases. So he had two flight cases, this thin guy used to pick them up like it’s an A4 sheet or something and bring it to the party. So the cops came and the only thing they saw is these records. So the neighborhood cop, uncle came and he’s like, calls one more guy and says, “Let’s go.” So that guy comes and they started lifting. First one hand, two hands, then both the guys trying to lift. Then they said, “Forget it, we don’t need this.” So they kept it. Kenneth Lobo You’ve now got all of these parties that you’re throwing, how were you guys getting the word out about these parties, in an era where the internet came to India in ’95? Tejas Mangeshkar It was the flyers. Basically we used to print… Mukul Deora It came but it wasn’t really there, you had the dial-up modem you know the fax machine sound. Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah, but actually what we used to do, we used to get our crews, these new... We had these new found crews which was almost, which used to come to parties, but they all became our crew and everyone we used to give a bundle of 250 flyers. All these things which you see the sponsors are for the printing and the décor. So United Printers used to give us 5,000 flyers. Some... One crew used to go outside J.J. School of Arts, Mondegar was one of the thing. DJ Reji who does Den nights [currently India’s longest running weekly club night] told me last month when I met him, he found a flyer and he had come to Bhavishyavani party that time, I said, “Where?” and he said, “At Leopold.” So basically this was how it was directly... We were there and you take it, that’s why some people who have just visited, were visiting Colaba, have also come to our parties, some guys from Pune in an old Fiat have come. There was this kind of mixed crowd but with flyers. It was the same. The guys who wanted to come somehow knew it. It’s like the internet now... Mukul Deora Because very few people actually... We had a journal like you said and we used to have, not fights but arguments because we used to tell someone, “You’re responsible for going around during the party and getting all the emails.” But that would never... If you remember me and Ashim used to get really pissed because he used to delegate it to someone and it never happened. We used to get one email at the end of the day. And nobody checked your email anyway in those days, it was only by this method, analog basically, it was all analog. Kenneth Lobo Where were you flyering, what parts of the city or… Tejas Mangeshkar Actually a lot of Colaba, South Bombay, Bandra, which was kind of this... Bandra had these places called Rock around the Clock, Go Bananas, Rock... These kind of names… Mukul Deora Colleges also. Tejas Mangeshkar Colleges also we used to send... And I think it, the most, the main guest list was not the random flyers but it was also the, the packets we made and sent to the creative agencies and the fine artists and this, all this kind of... Because we already had this core 50 people, regular visitors who used to get their 20 or something… Mukul Deora Did we SMS also? I vaguely remember… Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah, we used to SMS and just before that, some people had the pagers so we used to call and send on the pagers. Kenneth Lobo So, one of the things you all did to get the word out is also record mixes on cassette, is that right? We have one of these cassettes, maybe we can pull up the image. This is not the original cassette but… Mukul Deora It’s really quite a highlight in mine, in all our lives that, that we managed, slap dash as we were, to get something like this going. Benson & Hedges paid for it. That’s the & sign. God bless them. It’s genius, Kurnal did this, right? Bha for Bhavishyavani and Bha for Bahadur. Bahadur is... There’s an Indian comic company called Indrajal Comics and Bahadur is one of the first Indian, not super heroes, but kind of like super heroes, he’s like the Indian Batman, he’s a detective fighting for good and it’s Bha for Bahadur, Bha for Bhavishyavani, and Kurnal designed this cover and inside there’s a little comic where it’s Bahadur walking and there’s some guys... I don’t know if they’re fighting or harassing a girl or something and he beats them up and he’s like, “Nothing comes between me and my drum & bass.” Kenneth Lobo Can we have that image up please? Can we move one back? Ashim Ahluwalia Ironically the comic invitation is already predicting what’s going to happen at the nightclub that same night. Mukul Deora Yeah, that’s true, amazing. Kenneth Lobo How you do mean? Ashim Ahluwalia In a sense this is... Is that the one where we got the gun pulled on us? Tejas Mangeshkar This is Scream. Mukul Deora That was the second or third... Much later. Ashim Ahluwalia But the ethos of this comic, right, it’s all about how clubs were not, would not allow you if you were local…If you were just a local dude, right? And this is all about a stag that wants to go and listen to drum & bass, so it’s actually about the politics of club culture also. That we were not into this exclusive thing at all. Kenneth Lobo Since we were at the, the, the fight of this stag to get into a club, can we talk about what the crowd at Bhavishyavani gigs was like? Tejas Mangeshkar Basically we can open that one picture where... From Madness, where there’s a... It was basically a safe space, Bhavishyavani parties were a safe space for anyone to come and dance. You do not need to be scared on whatever… If you see this kind of mix of people, there’s Dodo in the center… Kenneth Lobo Who is Dodo? Tejas Mangeshkar Dodo is this guy in the center who is dancing with the white t-shirt, who had gone to Woodstock and had gone to the last Goa Trance party also. So he’s like a party guy. Ashim Ahluwalia Legend basically. A Bombay legend. Tejas Mangeshkar Legend. So you see behind is Milind Barsey big creative director from Lowe Lintas. These two girls in front are our Italian friends who used to distribute, helped distribute flyers. There’s Guido in the background, who’s German, and these guys I don’t know. Mukul Deora I think when you said about girls also, I think it’s important like you said, it’s safe. The other thing was that you had to go with your girl to a club, or whatever, here you can be a guy or a girl, it’s the same as we saw in club culture anywhere in the world. There’s not going to be guys hitting on girls, you can come, you can be yourself, you can be girls, you can be guys. You’re coming there for music, for some kind of community spirit I would say. Not like a normal night club which is, not so together, there’s no community. Anyone could come there and that was a very important part of the whole thing. Kenneth Lobo So even though you all had these conversations with the club owners about wanting to have your own crowd, it was still a very mixed crowd because the... There were also people from the club who could be… Mukul Deora Yeah, our own crowd just meant that, his whole trip with being on the door was out. Door control wasn’t there, that was the main thing really. Anyone was welcome, everyone was welcome to come but for them it wasn’t about... It was about restrictions. The club scene in India was about who can get in and who can’t get in, not... Who can’t get in rather or whatever. Ashim Ahluwalia You know something that I remember just watching a lot of escorts dancing on the dancefloor in sarees to like Goldie was one of the best images I’ve ever had in my life. Just being in a club and you’re... You got hipsters, you got party people, you got... And then you’ve just got the most random people smashed off their heads and just really into the music. No one’s bothering anyone, and there’s no finger pointing or... And I think that was something that was really special about these parties. Kenneth Lobo Ashim you’ve said in the past that even though Bhavishyavani is an electronic music outfit, your ethos was closer to a dub soundsystem culture, why is that? Ashim Ahluwalia I think because, essentially the soundsystem culture thing was very different, it was not DJ specific, it was not about the hero DJ, it was not about the star. It was about a collective and about everyone doing bits and pieces of everything. Even though everyone DJed, we played, we made music, we’re also part of the design even though there’s a design company, they’re part of the visuals, they’re part of the sound. There was a genuine collaboration and the second thing I think for me, was that there was an extension of this into a community. We’re sitting here the three of us, but there’s so many people I feel that have contributed to the Bhavishyavani sound and to that time. And those were all part of the crew and that crew has come and gone and they’re in different parts of the world now, but that was very important. I think we couldn’t have done this just as three people or four people. It had to be a community, because that’s what made it actually kind of fly. Kenneth Lobo Tejas can you tell us about some of the extended Bhavishyavani family, friends, that you all had? Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah we could say at that time they were the hipsters, you know how we call nowadays the bloggers and all, they were the kind of hipsters we had. We had, the immediate crew was our friend Shai [Heredia], who’s a film maker in Bangalore now. We had another film maker, what’s her name, Kiran Rao. Then we had and another, Shaina Anand who started dating Talvin Singh, so at that time what happened is, we got a lot of these kind of MIDIval Punditz access and DJ Rekha all that, we got the entry into the Asian underground to get their DJs and lots of designers from J.J.’s of course. J.J. School of Arts who helped Kurnal do a lot of designs, apart from his own ones. Who else was there at that time? Kenneth Lobo Shilpa Tejas Mangeshkar Yeah, Shilpa was there, was one of the... One who got the fashion angle into the thing. And recently also. Kenneth Lobo Shilpa is also your... Did you all meet at a Bhavishyavani party or… Tejas Mangeshkar We met at... Yeah we met at a... No we didn’t meet at a Bhavishyavani party, we met and we went to the first party together. Mukul Deora It was your first date. Tejas Mangeshkar And the second was the Shaadi. Ashim Ahluwalia He didn’t come as a stag. He was the only one who wasn’t a stag at the party. Kenneth Lobo So this sense of community also extended to the collaborations that you all had with artists, because I saw on the flyers that pretty early on you had MIDIval Punditz sort of come play at a Bhavishyavani party. Can we have the flyer up from… Tejas Mangeshkar Here it was Emdee, Bhaisaab’s name was Emdee. Mukul Deora This was actually the first Scream party, that was August, this was the first one and I was EmDee exactly. I remember the MIDIval Punditz played as well. Kenneth Lobo How did you even find out that MIDIval Punditz were in Delhi doing their Cyber Mehfil parties? Tejas Mangeshkar As I said, one of our crew member was dating Talvin Singh at that point and Talvin Singh had big interest with these guys and she told me and Ashim, I remember her saying that these two kids are doing parties in Delhi. So we said, “Why don’t we invite them?” So we, through common friends or something, we wrote them an email and they were sweetly came and also at the same time we had a MC, called MC Delhi. Poor guy he can’t come because he broke his legs, so he can’t make it tonight. Remember MC Delhi, Amrish, he was also from Delhi. So these three kids are from Delhi used to come, apart from the Ahmedabad boys who are called Bandish Projekt. Kenneth Lobo You also had this duo called Private Shochalay, who are today both incredible artists in their own right. Udyan Sagar, AKA Nucleya, and Mayur Narvekar, AKA Bandish Projekt, how did you all find out about them? Tejas Mangeshkar Actually Dot Com, Mihir Nath Chopra, who was from… Ahmedabad Kenneth Lobo Why was he called Dot Com? Tejas Mangeshkar Dot Com because he used to connect the dots and also he was kind of... And also was kind of the communications manager so Dot and Com. So Dot Communication Manager. He basically... He’s also the guy who’s responsible to actually print and produce these cassettes in 1,500 numbers. He basically started working with Channel V at that time from Ahmedabad, and he already told us when we met him that he has these two young boys and he started a label with them called Private Shochalay. We’re like, “Who are these guys?” “They want to come and meet you, they want to meet Bhavishyavani.” So one morning I remember, they came to Mahim station, they called us from the PCO and asked our address, it was nearby and they came and they came with this 100 CD ka, empty CDs ka case and whole weekend is spent… And Mukul and Ashim got their case logic there, I remember still Ashim had this, not Ashim sorry, Mukul, had this big bible kind of a thing with all these CDs marked really nicely with the album covers behind each. So they came for two days, actually they stayed with us for... In the office maybe for one week. They were staying and living in the office and next weekend Ashim and Mayur did a long mix which I think we have now. It was like a six-hour mix with tabla and DJ in the office. Before the first party we were doing these kind of office parties also. Kenneth Lobo So, maybe collaboration is a good way to close this conversation. It’s what took Bhavishyavani into the next chapter with the three Frenchmen: Mathieu Josso, Cyril-Vincent Michaud and Char Lee and it’s what will take Bhavishyavani into the next 20 years as well. Thank you very much guys. [applause]

---

Title: Aïsha Devi
Date: 2019-10-01
URL: https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/aisha-devi/

Aïsha Devi
Aïsha Devi uses her voice to break through the din of our current musical moment. Following early bedroom experiments in electronic and dance music in the 2000s, the Swiss-Nepalese singer and producer went through a personal transformation that led her to leave the past behind and embrace her birth name. In the early 2010s she set up the Danse Noire label with some friends and began to explore the potentials of electronic music in combination with meditation, philosophy and the scientific properties of frequencies. Using her voice, smeared with delay and reverb of unearthly proportions, and the Roland JP-8080 – a synth most synonymous with trance music – as primary tools, Devi has been writing and performing music that aims to break down barriers and induce transcendence in her audience.
In this lecture as part of RBMA Bass Camp Stockholm 2019, Devi spoke with Chal Ravens about her personal philosophy, why the voice is her preferred instrument and how she looks at ritualistic traditions as a source of inspiration for a new transcendental electronic music.
Hosted by Chal Ravens Hi everybody. Welcome to lecture number one of RBMA Bass Camp, my name is Chal, Chal Ravens, I’ve been working with RBMA for a little while, I’ve got a show on Red Bull Radio called Top Flight and today, well we have a guest who has been called “the high priestess of cybernetic conscious music,” which I think I like. She initially gained recognition some years ago now, but had a kind of a personal transformation maybe six years ago into her current style. She’s released several EPs and albums on the UK label Houndstooth and on her own label Danse Noire. She’s just about to release a new EP and has just... Or you’re in the middle of touring Europe. Aïsha Devi Yeah. I’m basically always touring. Chal Ravens Always touring. We’re going to hear a little bit about her, I think, quite unique approach to making music, her name is Aïsha Devi, please welcome her. [applause] Aïsha Devi Thank you. Thank you for having me. Chal Ravens There’s quite a lot to get through, but you wanted to do a bit of an introduction yourself to talk about the concept of frequencies. Yeah? Aïsha Devi Yeah, exactly. Chal Ravens Go for it, talk to us about frequencies first. Aïsha Devi Yeah I think because my approach to music is very much connected to that idea, that I think electronic music is the last contemporary medium that accesses ritualistic music and I think that electronic music is the platform for collective consciousness and actually inducing that kind of collective trance when we go into the forest and we rave together and we get that kind of elevating feeling and a kind of a communion and elevation together. So for me I started to get aware about that when I start meditating and I learned a lot of about meditation, through meditation I learned a lot about what is actually music? What is sound? Are we talking about the invisible order? Because music is intangible, you cannot catch music, it’s in the air. It’s the frequency in the air, it’s through radio, it’s something that doesn’t really exist, it does exist only in our ear and it does exist also physically in our body. So are we only talking about the invisible? Not really, because actually in quantum physics and modern physics theory it’s acknowledged that the origin of every matter, everything that you see, every form and un-form is actually manifested by a vibration, and a vibration is a frequency. So we can definitely say that sound is the source of every, the living, what we see, the matter. So I think that’s why ritual music is so important for me is that with good intention you can, and that’s what I’m aiming to do, produce music that is able to transcend to other dimensional spaces. We currently live in the 3D so we see stuff, we acknowledge the existence of the CDJ here or the computer, but there is acknowledgement of 11 dimensions, and scientists still don’t know how we go there. And I’m quite sure that with good intention in music you can actually transcend and elevate ourselves to upper dimensions. And I’m trying to produce music that is anti-gravitational. So that you maybe have seen some images of a frequency that is able to levitate things and I think that we are actually able to produce this kind of sound with our body, our voice and with specific frequencies from the computer. And I think that pop music actually is very submissive to our human condition that we have to stay in the 3D, but electronic music actually goes elsewhere and we can experiment with this and it’s very empowering for me to use these techniques because I can feel the reaction when I’m playing live and I have actually different little tricks to produce this kind of altered state of consciousness and I apply that to the music and also the voice. The voice I mean, it’s... Every instrument in the world is vibratory, you know you play the piano, you hit a note and then it will actually tap on the chord that will vibrate, that produces the sound, same with a guitar, same with a wind instrument, you blow and then it will actually activate a blowing and vibratory thing. So I think the voice is the most powerful vibratory instrument that exists, every animal has their own vibratory speed, and every human has a different vibratory speed. I don’t have the same voice as you have, everybody has their own signature and their own frequency and that’s what’s really interesting. And that’s what’s actually used in ritual music by shamans for instance, to guide people through invocations, through mantra, it’s used by ancestral culture. And it’s only in the Western countries that we don’t acknowledge that, that the voice actually can induce entrancement and healing. It has healing factors and I’m trying to use the voice a bit like a shaman too, as a kind of a guidance through a trip that you could have with music. I’m producing also music to put you in a certain state with your brain, and my voice will actually act as a kind of a shamanic guide, as if you take ayahuasca and you need a little bit of light to guide you through the trip. So I use different methods, I used binaural beats in the music which consists a little bit... I don’t know if you know what binaural beats are. Basically you have two different frequencies on the left and on the right and your brain will have to do work to integrate [them] because it’s not natural to have two different sources of frequencies. So it will make you work actually, reorganize all your synapses and it will produce a kind of modified state of consciousness. So I use that in the music, but I also use that in the voice and it’s very interesting because on the production you can record your voice, put a certain tone of your voice on the left and a certain tone of your voice on the right and then [to] un-tune both voices will provoke that kind of magic actually, where your brain will not understand this voice as a human voice but a kind of a supernatural human voice. So this is one of my tricks so if you want to use it, be free to experiment because it’s very powerful. I also use a lot... This is actually maybe very prominent in my live set, the exaggerating use of reverb and delay. You know in pop music, when you hear pop music now, I like pop music, but it’s very again submissive. It’s very framed. The use of the voice is super compressed and it really stays inside that human condition of the voice, it’s a bit of auto-tune, but nothing really crazy. You have to go outside of the pop music to understand that [the] voice has a bit of experiment as a different tool, like in metal music guttural voices are performed. In dub and reggae the amazing use of delay and echo that transform the voice. And that actually, that’s why reggae or dub music puts your mind and your body in another reality, because I think that reverb represents space and delay represents time and the three dimensions still have that time and space. And if you expand the reverb and the delay you can actually transcend these dimensional realms. So I’m using huge reverbs and huge delay that actually... Normally if you go through a program, you, any kind of a plug-in that is mimicking reverb that has that name, you can mimic the reverb of a room, you can mimic the reverb of a tunnel, you can mimic the reverb even of a cave. You can mimic the reverb of a church, but this is only mimicking space that does exist on earth, so I like that idea to produce a reverb that doesn’t exist on earth that is so huge that’s almost cosmic. And so it’s actually, your brain will integrate this space as a non-earthly reality and it will put your brain into again a non-human condition. It will expand the space in your brain actually and put you in a trance. Chal Ravens I think when you’re playing live the voice comes through in an even stronger way than when you’re hearing it on record obviously, because you can see you actually doing it. Can you tell me, I mean you’ve mentioned this a bit with setting yourself against pop, but tell me how your approach to your voice differs from pop music, differs from someone who is making electronic music and singing over it? Aïsha Devi Yeah, I really think that pop music uses voices as information. And I think they have stories to tell, when they’re doing songs about, “Oh you left me, I have a broken heart.” It’s all about the information, so that has a kind of, not awareness about the frequency of the voice. Of course you have a voice that touches you and really gets into your bones and you’re moved by it, but it’s something very unconscious and actually the treatment of, again in pop music, is very squared and doesn’t go outside to transcend our human condition at some point. It’s always referring to very anecdotic things. And I think that it’s not that I’m against pop it’s just that I feel connected to ritualistic music, I feel connect to invocation and that’s also why I love electronic music because it has that ability of infinity. For me electronic music is that space where the pattern is repetitive, where actually when I’m playing it’s good because I’m in a trance, I’m improvising, and it’s very much the impact of the audience they have on me and that kind of ping pong, responding to a certain energy. And I will never sing the same, so I don’t even know, I’m in that space, where I’m in a trance and I try to put people in a trance. And also with that idea behind my mind to heal people, you know, and I don’t think pop has that intention. Apart from selling. And I think more and more musicians now gather this kind of knowledge and know how frequencies impact our body and our mind and has the ability, I think that music has the ability to reorganize ourselves and even change our DNA because this just a representation of the mind, it’s the perception. Chal Ravens And you’ve explored some other singing styles as well, haven’t you? Like throat singing. Aïsha Devi Yeah exactly. Throat singing is something that comes naturally with meditating and as I have ancestor... I mean my father is from Nepal, I’ve always been... I grew up in Geneva in Switzerland so I felt a bit oppressed by that Calvinist system and everything so I needed to grab myself onto something that was different, something that I could connect with and I plunged myself into Asian ancestral knowledge. It’s not about religion, it’s about the knowledge of Hinduism, pre-Hinduism, the Vedic notion, the Buddhism and even Paganism and Animism you know, where voice and ritual music, and music actually was used as the essence. Music is actually, it’s an incantation, it’s a collective healing and it’s normally performed by a priest, so yeah. Chal Ravens Can you explain how throat singing actually works? Aïsha Devi So throat singing, it came across to me with Tibetan monks and they would actually have a ritualistic session, like kind of a prayer and they will start [with a] very, very low pitch and they will sing for one or two hours and then it will increase speed and increase pitch. And it’s very natural because every frequency has a connection with your body so when you are in a club and the subs are really banging, and I love that actually, when I play live it’s one of my most important priority that the subs are physical, it’s not, the subs are not a tone, the subs are actually a breath, a massage, and I like that massaging subs, you know. And they would start very, very low with a sub that’s kind of the weighting of the body and the highest they go in frequency and the highest you feel it in your body and then they will finish with a kind of enlightenment with the highest frequency here [points to top of head]. So throat singing and maybe all the Kargyraa singing, the Kume, Tuvan singing, Mongol polyphonic singing, actually is a kind of special resonance that you can do with your body. So throat singing you will actually make a resonance, you find a resonance cage in your lungs that will act and produce a second resonance. So you have your fundamental resonance and with the vibration of your cage you will have a second one and it’s magical because actually you feel your whole body vibrating, especially in the throat singing that is low, I like it. And it will again act a little bit like a binaural because the second frequency is a bit detuned compared to the first one. So you get the oscillation that will provoke magic in your body and I don’t know if I can do it now. I will try. It’s really like something like [gives example of throat singing]. So yeah normally I need to train a little bit more but you can have a little glimpse of the... And what’s funny with the human frequency range is that our range is in between, depends for male and a woman of course, but I was always frustrated not to have a deeper voice, and our frequency is between 100 hertz and can go until 8K or something like that, so it’s quite small in the range of instruments. And I was always frustrated not to have other voices and when I discovered [throat singing] I was happy actually that you can disintegrate the idea that you have one voice, and you can actually develop multiple voices. There is also the Kume, they are doing the resonance in the nose, I cannot do it, it’s really, really difficult because you have to find the resonance in the nose, it’s quite... But I’m working on it, but it’s just a kind of initiation thing that goes with the music, with the idea of finding the right frequency that will make everybody levitate. Chal Ravens Can we go backwards a bit then, because you’re actually a soprano, a classically trained soprano, right? Can you tell me a bit about your early experience with music and were you in a choir or what kind of singing were you doing? Aïsha Devi I mean, it was mainly an amateur choir, but I learned the techniques, I learned the rules, how of course you have to breathe, but the problem for me in classical music is that you are square into a technique and there is a right and a wrong, and for me music has no right, no wrong. I mean for me producing music, you know the rules and you break the rules. It’s all about, that’s why electronic is so empowering because you define your own territory and there is actually no limits. And I always train with this voice, and I love to use it as a soprano, it has also an impact. Classical music sometimes has also that idea of entrancement, with the poly-harmonization, the way it was also performed in churches, but this was used to hypnotize people for a certain idea, for a submissive idea or for religion. Again, I’m using all this little technique I’ve learned and grabbed them and transfer them into another place and hijack the clubs with this, because I’m still using sometimes the soprano voice in a performance, yeah. Chal Ravens What was your first encounter with rave specifically? Aïsha Devi The nature, I mean forest. In Switzerland, there is that very traditional idea of raving, collective rave, but in nature. It would be very secret. You have to find your friend, where is it? There is that excitement, you are doing something illegal, and it’s very empowering and very gathering, and you feel you belong almost to a little cult? It’s been very powerful, because it’s the first time I had subs going through my body, and actually all this let-go vibe where you feel that music has so much power on your bones, so much power on yourself, and you’re transformed. I think for me, raving was a transformative experience. The first time I heard electronic music, it was Pan Sonic live, and it was only harsh noise and frequency. I was, oh my God, I almost puked, I must say. I felt like something that was very violent and brutal in my body, but I loved it, because that was like the waking up call. That was the thing that music has such an impact on you, just frequency. I realized that I needed to use this frequency to spread some knowledge and the power of frequency is real actually, yeah. Chal Ravens You were releasing for quite a long time until the sort of rebirth, I guess, as Aïsha Devi. Can you tell me a bit about that experience? I believe there was a particular moment at which you decided to return to your real name, is that right? Aïsha Devi Yeah, I think again, I found myself, because my family is not typically Swiss. I mean my half-sister is from Jamaica, my father is from Nepal, my stepfather is from Tunisia. He’s a Tuareg from the deserts, so I mean I integrated all these different perspectives in the world and never found my place really in Switzerland. I think every strong transformation in me happened in nature, abroad [away] from Switzerland. Yeah, it was in the desert. It sounds a bit cheeky, but I was meditating in the desert and I felt so small. I heard noises, because even in emptiness and even in the cosmos, sound is there, sound, space, space is sound, you know? I felt that, and I realized that also in my music I didn’t need to put so much information. Actually again, space and reverb does organize the song as an energetic field, and it came to me like a knowledge, and I decided that... No, I didn’t decide actually, it came to my mind. Of course my real name is Aïsha Devi, it’s Sanskrit and it made sense with the path I was on. Chal Ravens It’s interesting that you mentioned dub and reggae at the beginning as well, because I think there are lots of similar ideas happening here. This idea of perhaps there being information that isn’t immediately given. Are you actually a fan of dub and reggae? Aïsha Devi I love all kinds of music, but I love this kind of music that puts you in an altered state of consciousness. I must say that dub and reggae really has this impact on my brain that I realize if you smoke a joint or you don’t smoke a joint, whatever. It’s a science and it has this impact on my synapses and I go away. I’m not belonging to this particular world, and it’s exactly like I have a track called, “I’m Not Always Where My Body Is.” This is exactly the feeling I’m talking [about] with dub you know. Chal Ravens It was important for dub as well, because so much of dub and reggae is about an imagining, a return to Africa, and also a connection with ancestors, you know? Aïsha Devi Exactly, and the way actually griot, for me hip-hop, for me hip-hop is also one of the only genre, if we can still talk about genre, hip-hop is one of the only genre in pop music that has that kind of entrancing quality. It’s the storytelling, of course there’s the information, but the debit of the voice, the frequency, the tone of the voice of the rap actually is a mantra, as a kind of the griot in Africa telling stories and healing people. It has very much that ability again to hypnotize you. Chal Ravens Are there any particular rappers that you like? Aïsha Devi I used to listen to tons of old school rap, but I like the mumble rap now, because it does illustrate exactly that idea, that words… It’s the same with... If you listen to mantra, or you do mantra and you do your mantra and then at some point the word doesn’t even mean something, it’s the frequency that lasts. Mumble rap, actually for me it has that transformation in your body, the word is not even important, it’s the resonance and the consonants and the tone of the voice. It’s interesting also to see that it’s different from a language to another. When I speak French, my voice is lower than when I speak English for instance. Every language has their own entrancement ability, but actually it was a bit studying that’s why mantras in Sanskrit are very effective. Because I’m learning a bit of Hindi and in Hindi the voice is very guttural, so you will really use [makes guttural sound] you can hear a little bit of the claims of almost polyphony when you speak Sanskrit. This happens in your body and of course in your throat, and then it’s relayed in your whole body and then you vibrate. Probably Hindi makes you vibrate a little bit more. Chal Ravens Can you tell me what the words are? Aïsha Devi The words are magic ritualistic words, it’s the frequency. It’s mixed between Sanskrit and the best way to put your throat and mouth that will give the frequency to entrance. Chal Ravens You’re not writing lyrics? Aïsha Devi I do, I do, there is a specific thematic normally I like to talk about. Then it’s a free field, normally when I record it’s like a meditation or ritualistic session. I record four voices, four-track, I record maybe one or two hours in one flow. I get in a trance and what you can actually hear on the recording is 1% of it, because I like that idea that I’m totally out of space. Chal Ravens Tell me a bit about your studio, your set-up and what you would do to create the track like that, what’s gone into it? Aïsha Devi I’m very much concentrated on my laptop, because it’s a bit my base. For me the laptop is my brain extension, and I love to use... As long as I love to use the machines live, because I think I love the interaction between the oscillation and the gesture that has the impact on the oscillation and then the oscillation changes and the audience feels that there is the gesture, impact, the sound, I love that. I’m using the JP-8080, Jupiter, which is an amazing machine that was produced in the ’90s and used for making basically trance music, like those huge trance anthems, because it has the specificity of the super saw [oscillator]. The super saw is actually binaural by itself. It’s two un-tuned frequencies, again, always coming back to that binaural thing. Chal Ravens Could you break down what a super saw is and why it’s a trance sound? Aïsha Devi A super saw is basically a frequency that is combined with a second frequency. A saw, you get different oscillation, but the saw is very much like the saw, like up and down like that. It’s very squared, I mean, very scratchy. Yeah, scratchy, exactly, it’s very scratchy. With the super saw, this is the saw, and the super saw is the combination of two frequencies, and one is a little bit altered, one is a bit un-tuned. It will act exactly as a binaural, and it will fuck up your brain literally. Especially because it has that scratchy ability, you can go on a high, the high frequencies are insane. Because again, the low frequencies are impacting here, the medium here, high here, [points to different part of body] and the highest frequencies will work on the highest part [of your body] and on your brain actually. Chal Ravens It’s the trance sound, isn’t it? It’s like when you think about… Aïsha Devi Exactly, yeah, trance music is named after this, that idea of trance. Chal Ravens If you’re recording maybe for an hour with your voice and getting into a trance yourself, but then you’re fixing that all up on Ableton and arranging it, how do you maintain a sense of extra dimensionality and all of these things when you’re looking at a screen? Do you ever find that just being on a screen takes you out of that? Aïsha Devi No, I don’t actually, because when I do EQ you look at your EQ and you do a little bit like that [moves knobs]. For me, EQ is in my head, it’s all a specialization in my head. It’s the same with my computer. All of my computer is actually there in my head, it’s in my brain. This is just a transposition of it, so I’m not stuck in a screen, I’m still in my brain. Chal Ravens That must be a skill that you’ve acquired through years and years of use. Aïsha Devi Maybe it’s the practice, or maybe it’s just depending on individualities. I don’t know, I cannot talk for other people, but it’s just that for me it’s the best, my best medium, and I have the feeling there’s nothing interfering between me and my ideas, and me or my impulses. Chal Ravens Sorry, so what were you saying that you use for your live set-up that would be... Aïsha Devi Yeah, for the live set-up it’s a bit different, because I have the Jupiter, the machines, and I use an effect for the voice, which for me is the best. I’m not using it for projection, but for live for me it’s... I’ve tested all of them, but it’s so lush and it’s digital but it still has the warmth and it keeps the warmth of my voice. I don’t know if I can say names of it, yeah, it’s the Space Eventide, I don’t know if you know it. It’s like a stomp box like that, that you normally use for guitars, but I found it amazing on the voice. It does exactly make what I was telling you before about that idea of building space, especially [space] that is out of this world. Actually, it’s funny, because the preset names are a little bit like that. It’s called the Spacetime, but the preset names are continuum, mega, I don’t remember, but mega dimensional or something. Yeah, actually people who produced the machine know that, they know that reverb can actually project your brain into altered state of consciousness. Chal Ravens Are you able to recreate the frequency effects that you want live? I imagine that must be quite difficult depending on the stage. Aïsha Devi With the voice you mean? Chal Ravens With everything I guess. Aïsha Devi Yeah, with the voice definitely, because again, it’s finding the frequency that will elevate, it’s all about trance. If you are in a trance you eventually go there. With the music, definitely with the Jupiter. All of my production for live, I like to use all of the spectrums. I like to stimulate of course the bass, with the bass, but basically I do a wall of sound. Of course, when I’m sending super high frequencies, they are super harsh. If you don’t hear the lower spectrum, it will feel unbalanced, it will feel super uncomfortable. But as I’m sending all the frequency range, it’s really balanced. I really take care of not staying in a little range, but actually cover the whole range, which is not only audible for human actually, because supersonic, there are frequencies above a certain K that you don’t hear and also sub you don’t hear it, you feel it. I like that idea to expand, and I’m quite sure that the more you stimulate this sound with our ears, the more you will be trained to hear them at some point. Animals can, why can’t we? Chal Ravens Right, there’s something for the animals if they want to come to your show, they’ll get a different experience. Aïsha Devi Yeah, definitely. Chal Ravens Can we go back to meditation, because there’s been quite a lot of... Meditation has been absorbed into a mainstream narrative recently as this mindfulness thing, that the workspace has mindfulness and so on. Can you tell me a little bit about your experiences and how you think meditation can affect creativity I guess? Aïsha Devi For me, meditation brought me to gather knowledge and brought me some knowledge. At some point, when you meditate, you forget your body, and you understand a little bit the frequency. You understand that this is just a representation, and you have the sense and the perception of other manifestation. It depends on the people again, but I’ll learn the breathing, I’ll learn... It helped me a lot to sing actually. What I learned with soprano singing was very oppressive at some point. Learning to sing when you’re meditating is all about the breathing. You follow your natural air, I would say. It helped me to breathe, it helped me to sing, but it also helped me to understand again, space again, that breathing and space is not empty. It’s a bit like a poster in graphic design, like the space... In a poster, there’s not only information, there’s space. Actually the space will organize the thing, you know? Space is as important as the tone, I understood that with meditation. Chal Ravens You trained as a graphic designer, right? Aïsha Devi Yeah. Chal Ravens Do you feel like you still see things in a sort of visual way sometimes? Aïsha Devi Oh, definitely. As an observer on the world, definitely. A transduction about fact and anecdote into something that is intangible sometimes, idea concepts, yeah, definitely. I kept that. Chal Ravens I don’t know which one it is, but I have read that there’s... Obviously you have a belief that meditation, that frequency can actually affect you on a cellular level. Somewhere I’ve read that there’s a track of yours that makes you younger. Tell me more. Aïsha Devi Yeah, I mean, again, when I produce music, I have intention behind the music. It’s like for me, a good movie is a movie that has different layers of comprehension. You can enjoy it only at an entertainment level, or there is another more subliminal thing in the movie. I like to produce music like that, music that is enjoyable to hear or not on purpose. Yeah, I put frequencies and information in there that actually have an impact on your cells. Chal Ravens You’re going to have to explain it a little bit more, because come on. Aïsha Devi Yeah, it’s very specific, and certain frequencies... You can see that in... I don’t know if you know what cymatics is? I don’t know if you know. It’s a little system you can build by yourself. You can put some sand on the kind of plastic that you tense. You put sand and then you would use a... How do you call that? Chal Ravens A tube. Aïsha Devi A tube, and then you will send with your voice some tone, some frequency, and then you will see actually that the frequency you are sending to the sand, will organize... Chal Ravens Well I have seen that. Aïsha Devi … the sand actually and you will create pattern in the sand. It can be even more visible with some professional thing. You can find that on the internet. But I built my own, I wanted to see the effect. I had to see that with my eyes that actually frequency organizes matter. And the highest you’re singing the more delicate the pattern will be on the sand. It’s very impressive at some point. So acknowledging this, you realize that this certain frequency has the same impact on your system, on your nervous system, on your bones, on your cells, on a very atomic level and I think that’s what interests me in music, that you have an atomic impact on people. So that’s what I’m... Using certain frequency to have that atomic impact on people. Chal Ravens I read an essay recently, which I would massively recommend, it was in The New Yorker and it’s by The New Yorker music critic called Jia Tolentino and she grew up in Houston and she talks in this essay about how she spent the first 15 years of her life attached to a megachurch on the outskirts of Houston where thousands of people come and it’s strict, evangelical Christianity and then at about 15 years old she is losing her faith a little bit or questioning and she sits in the car and puts on the radio and because it’s like 1999 in Houston it’s DJ Screw, and she discovers chopped ’n’ screwed and it changes her direction in life basically. Then she fast forwards 15 years later. And she’s talking about the drugs that she’s taken in that time and when she’s tried lean and then mushrooms and acid and she talks basically about trying to understand what it is about both religion and music and the drugs that are somehow connected. That she’s reaching towards something that’s the same thing. I only read it the other day and I felt like that had a complete connection to what you’re doing. Maybe the drugs, maybe not. But this connection between music and not religion, but a spiritual yearning seems to be something that runs right through your music. Aïsha Devi But yes, definitely. Again, the essence of music is not entertainment. The essence of music, it’s ritualistic. I mean if you go further as we can go, music was there to bury people. Music is there to announce a verse, it’s something very connected to our initiated trip at some point. And music was used to heal people like the shaman, you know, and then Judeo-Christianism entered the scene and they actually cut people’s power. The ability they had with music, they burned the witches in Europe. So they actually erased all knowledge that was connected to the invisible, like the power of music. And they took this knowledge to perform it for themselves, you know, to expand Judeo-Christianism and that’s why it’s really connected because actually when you go to a church you have again the big room. So a big reverb, of course it’s a trick, you know when you sing... I used to go to the church when I was a kid and when I was singing in choir in a church, you feel something definitely with the poly-harmonization that it’s entrancing, they know about... I mean the church, Judeo-Christian knows about trance. The pieces that were written for religious communion. It’s using exactly poly-harmonization. But the Western world has a problem to only, and especially also in pop music, only using the diatonic scale, which is only the 5ths, the 7ths. It’s always a kind of close harmonization. You know, and I like to look to the non-diatonic scale. The byzantine scale, the pentatonic scale, Chinese, I use a lot of semi and quarter tones also when I’m playing live because I think this is the entrancing tones and this is something that we’re not aware in a Western society how music, again, is like a drug because it is not only chemical drugs that have an effect on our brain connections. But music does too. So I think you can induce altered states of consciousness as almost a druggie state with music, you know. So of course. Chal Ravens All three of those things produce all altered states of consciousness to an extent. What’s it like to have all of that in mind and be working towards those ideas but still have to operate in a system, in this system, and to still have to obviously earn a living and play gigs and sell records hopefully. And does that feel, do you feel conflicted about having to kind of promote yourself or be part of the wider... Aïsha Devi I don’t really promote myself. I’m very bad at this. I don’t feel conflicted because when I play live it’s the gathering I’m waiting for. And I kind of, I like that idea of hijacking the clubs. You know, ’cause I got a chance to play on the best soundsystem in the world. I mean you get this huge Funktion-One thing, huge subs and it’s there and I’m using actually that huge hi-fi definition soundsystem to spread the knowledge, because my idea of experimenting maybe if you come to a live show is going away with the feeling there’s something happening, you know, you like it or you hate it, but there’s something happening maybe in yourselves or something. Chal Ravens OK. We have time for some questions. If anybody has any questions or would like to think of one. I’ve got a microphone here if anyone has got anything. Oh, straight away. That’s good. OK. Let me turn it on for you. Hold on, hold on, hold on, hold on. I’m going to come over. Audience Member Oh, okay. Yeah, I have a question. In the song we heard besides the reverb and the cutting of the vocals, did you alter them in any other way? Like stretch them or... Aïsha Devi Definitely, yeah, I did. I like, because again, like I was always frustrated with the idea of having a voice that is this range. So I love to pitch and alter the voice and you know like this is also the effect. When you hear, you recognize a human voice that is pitched so much. Like I think it’s plus 12 or something. It’s really one octave more. I cannot sing like that. That’s very frustrating. But it does have an impact again on the brain. I love doing this. I think it’s just, it does open some different territories that you are not able… And I think electronic music is so empowering. You can do this, you know we have the freedom to do it. So do it. Chal Ravens Are there any other kinds of vocal processing kind of tips that you might have or a little like shortcuts, or…? Aïsha Devi As I love to provoke and produce kind of ethereal voices, a lot of people, a lot of sound producers will say never alter the main channel of the voice. Never put effects or reverb on the main channel because it will alter the voice, the core of the voice. And I do the opposite. I do almost put every effect on my voice channel because then it will give, it will put out the weight of it. And I love that ethereal disintegration aspect of it. Yeah. Chal Ravens Anybody else? Yes, please. Audience Member Yeah. I have so many questions. Oh yes. I was wondering like, I actually have two questions. Like when you, when you play something, when you’re in the trance and you have a booking, do you think about the room you’re in and do you alter the music depending on the room and the people in the room? Because I find it… I think I do similar music and I’m very interested in trance music, like the Egyptian zar ritual, and everything, everything that’s trance I think is universal. But I find it very hard to perform it in spaces that are not, that I feel not, are not accepting of that kind of meditation stance. And how do you think about that? Aïsha Devi I think it’s our mission to transcend this and I think we are here now. That’s, that’s the reason why, and it’s interesting because of course you’re going to be playing in galleries, you’re gonna be playing in museums, you’re going to be playing clubs. There’s many different set-ups and I played in also in many different countries where stereotypes are there for sure. But I think electronic music is the best medium to contradict this and to actually erase all of these stereotypes. But in term of sound for sure, I will work with the room a lot. My sound check actually sometimes are two hours long and for me the sound has a priority, I could not have time to prepare myself but the sound needs to be really, really carefully EQ’ed in the room. And that’s also why I love to play in clubs because normally you have an especially good soundsystem that is balanced for the room. In museums sometimes a bit more difficult to adapt, but you always, I guess you also do that, you always have to take advantage of the room. For instance, if you have a huge space and the reverb, use the reverb. And of course it’s also a response with the audience. But I think we are here not to please people at some point we are here with some information that might sabotage, at some point, the system. So... Chal Ravens I like the idea of the kind of Trojan horse of electronic music being seen as maybe that just hedonistic, and the rave culture being seen as hedonistic, but you’re kind of doing some psy-ops underneath it. Was there another one? Audience Member Yeah. Thank you for, I just want to say thank you for talking about this and in what I think it’s just so great to hear somebody speak about like music, like a magical practice almost. But my question is about your live set-up. Do you use a special like mixer for your voice or like when you live mix? Aïsha Devi No, actually I am playing on Ableton Live and I will send separately all the channels. I separate the sub, I separate the kick, I separate all the synthesizers and I separate the voice. So every signal has a special frequency spectrum. And then the voice, I will send my voice in the mixer, send it [to] an auxiliary [for] the effect and then send the effects and the whole mix of the voice to the console. So it means [sending] to a stereo output for the music, which I already like EQ’ed myself, and then two-channels for the voice. So it’s two distinctive things, but I like to have control myself on the voice so I can really, really have an impact on the reverb and on the effect of the voice. Chal Ravens Cool. Anymore? Yeah. You can have your other question. That’s fine. Audience Member Yeah. I was just wondering how long do you allow like one sequence of a song to play, because you talked about like Tibetan monks doing the same tone for over two hours and have you like analyzed how long it takes for people to get in trance or if it’s more an individual or collective? Aïsha Devi It’s a very interesting question ’cause I thought about that yesterday actually. You know, like you have the pop format, the pop format, it’s three minutes something. They have to put a lot of information in that three minutes. I used to make longer tracks exactly for that purpose because it’s like ambient music. You see that ambient music doesn’t follow the format and extends and of course the trance can happen in a longer duration. And our brain needs to be stimulated. But I’m trying now to be a bit more concise and to put all the magic possible in a synthetic way. And I think we normally would need more like six minutes something. But with a lot of tricks and a lot of the intention has to be concentrated on that idea of entrancing people then it could be a bit shorter in, in a track that is recorded for a record or something. But during live for sure, the live, I’m building the live in an intention of elevation. So the frequency starts with a slow, it’s more slow motion and you have the subs, and of course this is, the structure of the live is different and we have the duration. I’m playing one hour normally, which is a good, I think it’s a good duration. So then you don’t have the fatigue because it’s quite, can be quite brutal. Sometimes you need to purge a little bit, you know, and yeah. Chal Ravens Six minutes. It’s actually quite convenient. I think that’s, yeah, that’s easy. If that’s all, then I think we’re going to say thank you so much. It’s nice to have you. [applause]
