Red Bull Music Academy — House & Chicago House

Source: Red Bull Music Academy Daily (daily.redbullmusicacademy.com)
Citation Tier: 2 (established music publication)
Articles: 8

---

Title: DJ Deeon And DJ Slugo Live Mixes + Chicago Session Gallery
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2012-02-28
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2012/02/chicago-deeon-slugo-gallery/

DJ Deeon And DJ Slugo Live Mixes + Chicago Session Gallery
Several weeks ago, the Academy touched down in the Windy City for a one-off session featuring a host of local legends representing different slices of the Chicago dance pie. Dance Mania's DJ Slugo and DJ Deeon knocked out fast-paced juke sets, Academy lecturers DJ Rashad and DJ Spinn dropped footwork blasts, and icons Frankie Knuckles and Michael Serafini spun classic house plates well into the night. Check the pics below, stream the live mix from DJ Slugo here and DJ Deeon here on RBMA Radio.

---

Title: 5x5: Mobb Deep Interview
Author: Sacha Jenkins
Date: 2012-07-11
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2012/07/mobb-deep-interview/

5x5: Mobb Deep Interview
As part of last year’s Red Bull Music Academy World Tour, five hip hop legends – each representing one of the five boroughs of New York, the birthplace of hip hop – took the couch over five days, and each lecture was followed by a show in their own neighbourhood. Coinciding with this week’s Brooklyn Hip-Hop Festival, we present the highlights of each lecture for every day this week. Today: Mobb Deep. Interview by Ego Trip’s co-founder Sacha Jenkins.
RBMA: So, Havoc and Prodigy. Here we are, years later. We see where hip hop has come and gone, but I wanna start out with before hip hop. Havoc, for instance, I first met Havoc as a graffiti writer. We were in Queens, and the middle track where they park the train is called the layup. When trains are out of service, that’s where they would park them. And the first time I met Havoc was with a guy from Queensbridge who wrote DMC, who was a friend of mine, who was in my crew. And he was like, “Yo, my little man is a real ill artist. You know, he has the fever, he wants to hit these trains.” And so, the thing about hitting the trains was you didn’t want to go from the platform. So you’d have these beams on the side, where the trains are elevated. I just saw this little dude climb up the beam like it was nothing. So, I knew from a very young age that he was artistically inclined. Then I also know that the gentlemen to his right, they both went to art and design high school. So, a lot of recording artists are also fine artists. Because their minds are wired differently, fine art is a way to express themselves. So, I wanted to ask you guys about, you know, your interest in art or drawing, and how you guys wound up at a specialised high school for art.
HAVOC: Well, I started art, like, from a young age. Since I was like maybe three or four. You know, I drew a picture of my mother when she was pregnant, when I was like three. And it just started from there. My father was an artist, and I always liked to draw, you know what I’m saying. So naturally, choosing a high school, you know, Art and Design was one of the best places for me to hone in on my artistic skills and the rest was history after that, you know what I mean. 1988, that’s when I went to Art and Design, and met P.
RBMA: How about you, P, in terms of drawing, or how that’s just another manifestation of your creativity?
PRODIGY: Yeah, I mean, I went to Art and Design cuz a lot of my friends in the neighbourhood were going there. Cuz I just wanted to be with my friends. I really wasn’t into art that much. I got into it by going to that school and being around everybody like Hav and certain people that I met that was really into art. They got me more into it than I was. But Hav is like incredible with it.
HAVOC: I’m alright.
PRODIGY: Nah, when we was in the crib one day, he drew my face perfectly with a pen, just making dots. Like, no mistakes, with a pen. He’s ill with it. But I just really went to be there with my friends was there. And I ended up, my and Hav, and it just ended up being something else.
RBMA: So the art went from, maybe in the studio he’s drawing perfect pictures of you, but together, in the studio as artists you were painting different kinds of pictures. And that’s when the first record, soon after, came. Tell us about those early days.
PRODIGY: Yeah, the early days was like, when we first met, started hanging out, we both had a love for the music. It was a lot of travelling on the train. We would like take the train every day to Coney Island, to the only studio that we could really use for a good price that we could afford, was in the projects out in Brooklyn, in Coney Island. We used to go out there and uh, every day we used to cut out of school and take the train, it was like an hour, two hour ride, you know, work on songs, work on our demo, put together a nice demo so we could start shopping around. A lot of those early memories, it’s just like, being on the train with some 40s, smoking weed between train cars, and on the train, stuff that you can’t even do today, you know what I mean, in New York, really.
“Queensbridge is the biggest projects in America. It’s 96 buildings, and it’s just a lot going on out there, man. And there’s so many styles and slang, it was just like a breeding ground for uniqueness out there.”
RBMA: And you were also interested more in the production end back then, right?
PRODIGY: Yeah, you know I was just trying my hand at it back then, that was when I first started really getting into it. I think Hav inspired me to do it because we used to go to his crib, I think it was the one in Ravenswood. And you used to have the records, with a stereo cassette deck, with record on it. Yeah, and he used to do record and pause, record and pause, record and pause, and loop a beat up on cassette. That was the first time I ever seen something like that, and he was actually making beats on it, you know what I mean. He would record, like, songs from the radio. He would listen to radio shows late at night and catch some ill samples. And Hav’s pop was a DJ, so he had a lot of records and I seen him, that was the first time I seen somebody sampling and looping like that, and it got me into wanting to try that, too.
RBMA: Tell us, I mean, your pops was an artist, a DJ, tell us about him.
HAVOC: Artist, DJ. You know, we fell asleep to banging music, you know what I’m saying. You know, we like five years old and the music is just banging in the little ass apartment. So, we was just so used to music, you know what I’m saying, and, you know, after Pops bounced, he left the records. So, you know, I kept them shits, you know what I’m saying, they just, put some use to it.
RBMA: So, language is a big part of what you guys do. I’m from Queens, and different boroughs have different ways to express, you know, where they come from. You guys were big proponents of the done language. And, you know, English obviously is the foundation of how we speak, but you guys are architects of your own language, and that’s an important part of Mobb Deep is, because that also travelled, and had an influence, and helped to create different dialects based on what you guys created. Talk about language. I mean, I know it’s a little all over the place, but I think it’s a big part of what you guys bring to the table.
PRODIGY: Yeah that, that really like came from, like Queensbridge, period. Like, Queensbridge is the biggest projects in America. You know, it’s 96 buildings, and it’s just a lot going on out there, man. And there’s so many styles and slang, it was just like a breeding ground for uniqueness out there. So when I first came out there, I seen all that immediately. The way they dress different, talk different slangs, different you know, and you know like you say, each neighbourhood, each region got their own way of talking. Down south they’ll say something, Queens, Brooklyn, The Bronx, they got different slangs everywhere. So, Queensbridge just had a real unique slang and dress and all that. One of our friends from out there, his name’s Bumpy. You know, he had a speech impediment, and every time he used to say ‘son’ – you know everyone was like, “Yo, what up, son?” He used to be, “Yo what up, dun?” He used to talk with a lisp, you know what I mean. So, we started all just saying it, “Yo, what up dun, what up, dun?” You know what I mean? And it just all came from there. That was like a part of it, and then we turned it into a whole, like, our version of pig Latin. Like we wanted to talk to each other, and if we didn’t want somebody around us to know what we were talking about, we be like, “Yo dun, dorty over there got the datty,” Like you know what I mean. So that’s where that came from, the dun language.
RBMA: I mean, that’s a serious cultural McNugget right there, where that came from. Who knew? Speech impediments. But Queensbridge, during that era when you guys where making that music, what a lot of people don’t understand – you know, I did an article for Vibe, I think it was about ’95, I interviewed everyone from Queensbridge and what was going on then. And a lot of guys who were down with these guys are no longer with us. And the climate and the intensity that you feel on this record, if you understand where they come from, you understand when this guy says there’s a war going on outside, there literally is a level of intensity that, I can’t say it’s necessarily on par with someone that is in the Middle East or something right now. But for a lot of these black and Latino individuals, it was a very intense time. So, talk about what you remember, sitting on the park bench. Talk about some of the cats who aren’t with us anymore, who are integral to what created that album.
HAVOC: I mean, it’s a lot of situations out there like, you got six blocks out there. Each block is like it’s own neighbourhood, and [that] just makes Mobb Deep. I mean Queensbridge, you know what I’m saying. So, you might have dudes from, you know, one block, two different blocks, that might used to have been friends. And now the next thing you know, they beefin’ over who can sell drugs on the hill. And next thing you know they’re just shooting at each other, killing each other like, you know, my man Draws, God bless the dead, he used to gun it out all the time, and um my brother, Killer Black – rest in peace, God rest the dead – he was one of the wildest dudes out there, you know what I’m saying. And he used to hang with dudes from the other block, like, the opposition block. And our block, where we was from, was where he was hanging with them. So, he used to have to come home to where the beef was at. You know what I’m saying, and niggas used to have to come to me like, “Yo son, you know you brother, he’s from the block,” but they knew not to touch him, you know what I’m saying. So, the thing is, when you’re going through things like that, where you could just come outside, and your brother got beef with somebody, he shoot them, and the next thing you know, you gotta watch yourself, because your brother done shot somebody in the face, and you sitting in your car, nigga wetting your whole car up, you know what I’m saying, what other kind of music you gonna make?
RBMA: So what is it, so when you look back now, looking at, literally, you guys were in a war. You know, when you look at that album, what do you think it represents, in terms of where you guys were at in your lives at that time?
HAVOC: I mean, it just, it represents the struggle, you know what I’m saying, the hunger, the will to make a better situation for yourself and get up out the projects, you know what I’m saying, to make a better living for your family. But to make it out of there is nothing short of a miracle, because you don’t have to leave out of there, and then just any kind of circumstances could just put you in the grave. You know what I’m saying? From police, you know, planting stuff in your car and in your pockets. Putting you in jail from the dude that’s jealous of you cuz you shining a little bit more than him, you know what I’m saying, so it’s just, like I said, it’s nothing short of a miracle, making it out of there. In that era right there, the album that we did, it just describes just that. If you listen to it word for word. You know, you got a lot of rappers out there, that they be rapping, and they just be saying that, they be lying a lot, you know what I’m saying. But the shit that we went through is just so real, it’s just a blessing that us two is still here, you know what I mean?
RBMA: And to bring it full circle, I mean, this is the same cat on that album who said no matter how much loot he gets, you know, he’s never leaving, I mean he’s staying in the project forever. You know, that’s how you felt.
HAVOC: Yeah, that was metaphorically, because people always come to me, they like, “Yo I thought you wasn’t leaving the projects.” What I meant was my heart would never leave the projects. It’s like, I always will remember where I came from. You understand what I’m saying. So, when people take those words literally, I be like, “Damn, what grade you graduated from? What school? Oh, you didn’t finish, just like me. No doubt, it’s all good.”
RBMA: And then you took it to another level with the imagery, using the sort of Queensbridge, you know, “Welcome to Queensbridge”.
HAVOC: The housing authority sign, yeah. We just took that and just put it as Mobb Deep, you know what I mean? Word.
PRODIGY: It was like, using it was just like, welcome, you know, to our world. Just like it say welcome to whatever houses all over New York for the projects.
RBMA: Queensbridge is the largest housing project in America. He said with great glee, “The 41st side, get bent, run wild.” Now, for those that don’t know, Queensbridge is separated in two sections in terms of streets. These gentlemen represent the 41st side, Nasir Jones is from the 40th side. Tell us about the differences between, are they more thorough on the 41st side?
HAVOC: I mean, you know, I love the whole Queensbridge, but the 41st side was the real side. The 40th side was like the corny side. They didn’t really know how to dress really on that side, you know what I’m saying. But they just got one ace card and that was Nas, you know what I’m saying. It was all good, you know what I’m mean.
RBMA: Poet and Hot, isn’t Hot Dave from the 40th side?
HAVOC: Yeah, yeah, yeah, Hot Dave’s from there, too. But we got Marley Marl, Roxanne Shante, MC Shan, we got all of them on our side, you know what I’m saying, so go figure.
RBMA: Well, explain to the young folks here who don’t have the same kind of club experience that us older gentleman might have had. Tell us what it was like in the clubs, like the Tunnel, the Muse, how you could get cut, stabbed, shot up, knuckled down, or one or four of those options. Tell us about the intensity of being in the club back in the days.
PRODIGY: Oh yeah, New York, period, man. New York was a different place back then. You know, it’s still definitely wild right now, you can get killed in New York right now, you know what I mean. But it was very different back then, because there wasn’t a lot of cameras back then. It wasn’t so much, the police wasn’t on it, on it like how they on it right now, you know what I mean, with all this terrorist talk and all this stuff. It’s crazy, man. It was crazy back then, you know. And clubs, you know, it was just wild, it was off the hook back then. The music was different, you know what I mean. The music was wilder, you know, so it just amped the people up even more. You know what I mean, so, just all around, period. The environment was definitely more intense and more dangerous in those days.
RBMA: But you were on, your music was on. You’re with your crew, you got your new whip, you got your cell phone, pager, whatever. You’re hyped. Like, talk about that experience of feeling that, being in the moment, people knowing who Mobb Deep is, people wanting to test Mobb Deep. All of that goes with the territory. Talk about that.
PRODIGY: I mean to tell you the truth, the first one, two albums, we was taking the train to ours. You know what I’m saying, like, we would all, there’d be like 30, 40 of us, and we would all hop the train, you know, get on the train or whatever, go to the show. After the show, hop the train, go back to the projects, you know what I mean. That’s how we were moving for a little while. And we was just having a lot of fun. And a lot of it is just, you know, being high as hell, drunk as hell, you’re 18, 19. You got, you know what I mean, a nice record playing on the radio, videos, you’re feeling yourself, you got all your people with you, it’s just a big celebration. And not to mention who we our, where we come from, the lifestyle that we living, we just bringing all that baggage to the celebration.
“They come with this fake persona, and trying to be, like, the rapper, and they’re not really living it. Cuz this ain’t a game to really play with. Music should be fun, but this is street music, so we not going to fool ourself.”
HAVOC: Yeah, but it wasn’t too many people trying to test us, though. You know what I’m saying, cuz when you see like 30 dudes, you know what I’m saying, coming up in the club, you know what I’m saying, niggas just show their respect. You know what I mean, it wasn’t too many people really, you never heard us really getting into too many altercations like that, because you know where we come from, they know it was real. So, real recognise real, you know what I’m saying. So we ain’t had many problems like that.
RBMA: So why do you think so many rappers are in the, aren’t so realistic about what it is and where they come from? Why do you think there’s such a disconnect?
HAVOC: Cuz a lot of people’s just in the game to make money. They’re not really real artists, you know what I’m saying. And then they come with this fake persona, and trying to be, like, the rapper, and they’re not really living it. But then when they go somewhere and get smacked in the face by somebody, then they know that it’s really real. Cuz this ain’t a game to really play with. Music should be fun, but this is street music, you know what I’m saying, so we not going to fool ourself. So, if you, you know what I’m saying, rhyme about a certain thing, you know what I’m saying, dudes is gonna test you, you know what I’m saying. And a lot of dudes is coming out here, you know what I’m saying, rhyming about, “Yo, I sold drugs on this block” and this, that and the third, and as soon as they get stepped to, they fold. You know what I mean.
RBMA: So tell us a bit about the making of “Eye For An Eye”. A lot of legendary cats on there with you guys.
HAVOC: Yeah, Nas and Raekwon. Yep.
RBMA: Tell us about the song, how it came together, what you remember about it, being in the studio...
HAVOC: Well, that was like, towards, like, the middle of the album. It was a lot of good energy going on at that time. We was labelmates with the Wu-Tang, and we clicked with Raekwon and them really good, like we really gelled with them. And Nas is from around the way. To this day I can’t even really remember how we got all of them into the studio, because it’s hard to get dudes in the studio all at one time.
PRODIGY: I remember. Scott Free used to work at Loud, with Matty C. They were the two A&R’s up there that signed, Scott signed, got Wu-Tang signed, and Matty signed us. Um, Scott wanted us to meet Raekwon and them, so he took us to Staten Island one night, and we got drunk and high with Rae and Ghost, and some other niggas out in the harbour.
RBMA: Were you smoking some dust? That’s big out there.
PRODIGY: I think they might have slipped some dust in one of our blunts or something like that, cuz I was feeling higher than I ever felt in my life.
HAVOC: Yeah, when I got home I was walking in slow motion, like this. They put some shit in my shit.
PRODIGY: Yeah, and that night I remember Raekwon, he drove us back to Queensbridge, cuz we had took the ferry out there. And on the ride back, he was like, “Yo, what’s up with that dude Nas, man? We trying to do a song with him, I want to put him on my solo album.” And I was like, “Yo, we gonna hook that up.” So then the next day we hollered at Nas, and through that conversation we ended up just all doing the song together.
RBMA: So you had to go do the song past 40th side to talk to Nas?
PRODIGY: I don’t even know how we reached out to everybody, I think Hav reached out to ‘em.
HAVOC: You know, I be fuckin’ with, you know, both sides anyway, you know what I’m saying. But, you know, I was already hanging with Nas before all of this anyway, so I guess, you know, we must have made that happen, or whatever, but, you know what I’m saying. But, it happened.
RBMA: So, you have the line, Prodigy, “You watch me while Jake’s tryin’ to knock me and lock me.” Bringing it back to the dun language, explain here to our friends in the audience, who’s Jake?
PRODIGY: Yeah, Jake is the police. That’s a slang term that come from Queensbridge for the police, from that TV show, Jake And The Fatman. It was a cop show, so we used to call the police Jakes. You know what I mean, yeah, “You watch me while Jake’s tryin’ to knock me and lock me.” That means the police trying to arrest you and lock you up.
RBMA: Speaking of Jake, talk about the relationship between the police and cats in Queensbridge. It’s, you know what I mean, it’s complicated.
HAVOC: I mean, like you know, we all know the D’s, you know what I’m saying, the D’s knew us. We used to know the D’s by they first names, you know what I’m saying.
RBMA: ‘The D’s’, as in, for those who don’t understand, the detectives.
PRODIGY: Or the ‘dicks’.
HAVOC: It was like a cat and mouse game, you know what I’m saying, it’s like they’ll see you, they say what’s up, they be friendly, but in the meanwhile they looking at you like, “You know Imma get you, you know Imma have to get you.” So, it was like that.
RBMA: “Temperature’s Rising” [is] one of my favourite songs on the album. It shows a level of sensitivity that I think is important in hip hop, in terms of creating. What they, go back to what they’ve been saying about reality and being honest, you know, and I think that is one of the reasons this album has stood the test of time. Do you remember where you recorded it, or…?
HAVOC: Yeah, Q-Tip helped us do that song right there. He actually came up with the sample, and the drum pattern and all of that. And he was in there just kinda guiding us through, you know what I mean. Cuz the sample was “Temperature’s Rising”, that was the original sample, was “Temperature’s Rising”.
RBMA: By who?
HAVOC: The one now is with Patrice Rushen, but the other one, the “Temperature’s Rising” that actually had the “Temperature’s Rising” sample in it, I can’t remember at this time. But the original one said, “temperature’s rising,” actually in the sample, and that’s what made us reflect on what we was going through, because it just fit so well in what we was going through, and then later on we sample – we did it over, and we sampled Patrice Rushen. I can’t remember the song, but it was Patrice Rushen.
Lecture: Mobb Deep (RBMA World Tour 2011) from Red Bull Music Academy on Vimeo.
RBMA: And, talk a bit more about Q-Tip’s influence, working with him at that point, you know, overall on the record. I know he was instrumental early on with your careers.
PRODIGY: Q-Tip, we use to cut out of school and we used to look on the back of the cassettes for the address of the record labels, after we made our demo out in Coney Island. You know, we used to cut out of school and take the train and go to the different labels. One of our main labels that we wanted was Def Jam, you know what I mean, so we used to just stand outside the door at Def Jam, you know, and just wait for like the rappers to come out, or wait for somebody to come out the door, and just be like, “Hey, excuse me. You listen to this song real quick, man, we’re a rap group,” you know what I mean. So, a lot of people was like, ‘yeah, fuck outta here’, or just act like they ain’t hear us or whatever. Q-Tip actually came out the building and was the only one that stopped, and actually was like, “Alright, let me check it out.” And he put on the headphones and he listened to us, listened to our demo. He sat there and listened to a few songs, actually, and he was like, “Yo, I like you dudes.” And he’s like, “Imma bring you into the office and introduce you to some people.” So, from that point – you know it was like three years later when we was working on The Infamous, maybe three, four years later. We just reached out back to him, like, “Yo man, you know, we got this new sound that we created, you know what I mean, it’s real hot, we got these hot records, we about to drop this hot album. We want to bring you in as a producer, and help us out with the sound.” To make our sound that quality shit, that quality level like he was doing for A Tribe Called Quest. We was always a fan of his and Tribe’s music. So, yeah, he came in and he blessed us, man, with a few tracks, and tweaked up some of the beats, and, you know, did the bass drums and all that, yeah.
RBMA: So, when you guys went to wait outside of Def Jam, how long did you wait until someone was nice enough, like Q-Tip, to say, “Okay, I’ll listen to your demo.” Were you out there for days?
PRODIGY: It probably took us like two or three days of going over there and just chilling, you know what I mean, until we finally caught a break.
RBMA: I mean, would you pack a lunch, did you have headphones, like---
PRODIGY: 40 ounces, man. 40 ounces and butter crunch cookies, and a dream.
RBMA: And just the two of you, not the whole Queensbridge?
HAVOC: Nah, just the two of us, that’s it. Thirsty.

---

Title: Headphone Highlights: Roll Deep
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2012-08-15
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2012/08/roll-deep-headphone-highlights/

Headphone Highlights: Roll Deep
Roll Deep are one of the most infamous grime cartels in London. Founded by Wiley, made famous by Dizzee Rascal and encompassing the likes of Trim, Skepta, Riko and countless others, it has been one of the cornerstones of the scene for a decade. In their Headphone Highlights session – check the audio at RBMA Radio – Flow Dan and J2K recount a few of their favourite grime moments.
Dizzee Rascal “I Luv U” (XL Recordings)
FLOW DAN: First up, we’ve got Dizzee Rascal with “I Luv U”. This, for me, would be a very influential track to the grime scene because it would be the first song that Dizzee actually put out officially to say, okay then, he’s a new artist, he’s that Boy In Da Corner from Roll Deep, and it’s the one that I saw people actually taking to and really taking Dizzee seriously as an artist.
Dom Perignon & DJ Dynamite “Hungry Tiger” (Mos Wanted)
J2K: So the next tune we’re gonna bring up is “Hungry Tiger” by Dom Perignon and DJ Dynamite. This is a personal favourite, I’d say, ’cause this was a riddim that always made me want to MC on it, whenever this came on I wanted the mic. Basically, just wanted to spit on this beat all the time. I never wanted to let this one pass when it came on, so I’d be hungry for the mic every time this one came on, it’s my favourite still.
Roll Deep “Shank Riddem (When I’m Ere)” (Roll Deep Recordings)
J2K: “When I’m Ere” was probably one of the best crew songs, I’d say, in the grime scene, ever made, I’d say. Yeah, I’d probably put it down and say that. Definitely from like a whole crew, innit, not guests and that. Yeah, everybody went in on that song, it was like, you know everybody had the same formula, everybody just did their part on it, the video was crazy. Yeah, man, it was just an all-around sick tune. It was started by Roachee – if you need a little history lesson on that – yeah, man, it was just a crazy tune, bruv, I don’t even know what else to say about it, I wish I was on it, to be fair.
Jammer “Murkle Man” (Jahmektheworld)
FLOW DAN: Jammer “Murkle Man” is a very substantial track for the grime scene because Jammer is actually the first person, I believe, to put so much character into the performance. He actually had a superhero suit on, he turned himself into the Murkle Man. The video was very animated and the energy was mad high in the track, and if you’ve ever seen it performed, you would know everything that I’m saying is true.
DJ Eastwood “U Ain’t Ready” (Black Majik Recordings)
J2K: Eastwood “U Ain’t Ready”: this tune just reminds me of the Eskimo Dances, the Sidewinders. This was like that classic moment where something was going to happen when this beat come on, whoever gets that drop was about to do something mad. So “U Ain’t Ready” was definitely a classic for the raves, I would say. I definitely used to like this one, it’s a favourite still.
Wiley “Eskimo” (Wiley Kat Records)
FLOW DAN: “Eskimo” by Wiley is a very influential instrumental that helped carve out the grime scene separate from the garage scene. So, it turned it into more of a club-based platform for MCs to do their thing. And I think that’s the only beat that I’ve heard people that don’t know about grime or garage like. People that don’t even know what our music is, they just knew that that beat was infectious, it was too much, and it made some people even become MCs, I reckon.
Roll Deep “Snakes And Madders” (Roll Deep Recordings)
FLOW DAN: The “Snakes And Madders” track off of the No Comment mixtape, which is by Roll Deep, was a quite easy track to make because it ain’t really got a chorus, like a traditional chorus or a hook. It’s taking it back to when MCs just wanted to express themselves and just get the vibe up, and just showcase your talent and showcase what you can do on a beat. So, Roll Deep plus probably one featured artist, we just came together in the studio and everyone just wrote their craziest showing-off bars, like just glorifying themselves. And that’s what really the early grime was about, so we just took it back to that. And the beat is made in-house as well by Scratchy D, and he’s a mad person so he just said "Snakes And Madders" and then that’s it.
Diddy feat. Skepta “Hello Good Morning (Grime Remix)” (Bad Boy)
FLOW DAN: “Hello Good Morning”, the grime remix, now this alone is a very influential track, well not even influential, but it’s a first, because it’s Skepta, which is born and bred from the grime scene, and he’s remixed a Puff Daddy song officially. Puff Daddy contacted him and said, “Can you remix a song?” That alone is big in itself. The song came out good, away from that, but just the fact that it’s a grime remix by an authentic grime person. Puff Daddy, I need not say no more. The song came out good, I love the beat, it’s got those authentic Skepta sounds and yeah, I’m glad it got done.
Roll Deep “Palava” (Roll Deep Recordings)
FLOW DAN: Roll Deep “Palava”, straight off the No Comment Star mixtape. That one was another mad one. The whole process of the whole mixtape was really just a loose, free thing. We’re just all in the studio, or someone’s going to set pace on the tunes, and you’ll be in there just flexing your abilities. So, this was no different really. This one’s probably set by me, I think. This beat was playing in the studio, I liked it. And really what happened was, the actual chorus, which I wrote, actually started off as my verse, I was writing it as a verse, and then I got to a point with it and I thought, it sounds good there, just repeat that. So, I left it as that and then wrote a new verse, and it came out crazy, everybody just went in on it and everybody’s kind of taken to this track, as well. It’s one of the first songs we dropped off the mixtape and it’s getting a crazy response right now. So everybody’s happy with this one, the video’s sick, it’s shot by Kalvie [Kalvadour Peterson], it’s a crazy video. “Palava”, that was sick, man.
Ghetto “Top 3 Selected” (J Clarke Enterprises)
FLOW DAN: Ghetto with “Top 3 Selected” – to me this is a track that got done at the right time, because if you’re a grime artist you should think you’re one of the best. Even if you ain’t, you should think that and try to manifest that. So, this tune got done and it’s called “Top 3 Selected”, and it created such a hype over, who is the top three, who’s the number one and so forth? I’ll leave it there, let Jason take over.
J2K: Basically, it just opened up a conversation and all these arguments. That’s what was good about it – who is actually top three selected? It’s always up for debate since this tune came out, so ever since then everybody thinks they are top three, and you’ve got people who will disagree, and then it creates that competition, because if you think you’re top three you’ve got to prove it. Why are you top three, what’s your record? It just created a whole lot of debate for the grime scene, so that definitely carved out its place in this history still.
Lethal Bizzle “Pow! (Forward)” (Relentless Records)
FLOW DAN: “Pow” by Lethal B and the rest of the mandem, that tune obviously needs no words, that’s history, innit, that’s grime history right there. That got into the charts, I swear it got a top ten in the charts, or round about that. It was one of the first to do that. Obviously, it was killing every club. It was getting banned from clubs, moshpits, arguments, fights, everything. That just created the most maddest moment and it still does, that’s what’s crazy about it. You can still take that anywhere and still kill the place with it. It was a good video. I was actually in the original video. You probably wouldn’t even notice me but I was in, Flow Dan see. I saw the excitement and there was girls there and that, and I just wanted to be next to them. So, I had a little feature in the original, you get me? So yeah, that’s all I can say really.
Roll Deep “Bumba’Ole” (Roll Deep Recordings)
FLOW DAN: Roll Deep No Comment Star mixtape has got a tune on it called “Bumba’Ole”. Now, it’s a mad title because it’s actually swearing in Patois. But the same point is that, that’s what grime’s about. Grime’s about bringing all the different cultures that Roll Deep have grown up listening to, and being and we are, so it’s all in one pot, a mix. We’ve got a tune called “Bumba’Ole” and it’s just basically a person that’s not a very good person in life, so if you’re not a good person in life you’re probably one of those, and we’ve just done a song about that. Because the No Comment mixtape is just about being straight grime and having that attitude, that original grime attitude, it would be fitting to have a song called “Bumba’Ole”, because it’s a word we use often and we don’t like them, so we made a song, simple.
Title image left to right: J2K, Flow Dan and Scratchy of Roll Deep

---

Title: Interview: Mobb Deep on Their Two Decades in the Rap Game
Author: Jeff “Chairman” Mao
Date: 2013-11-25
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/11/mobb-deep-interview-2013

Interview: Mobb Deep on Their Two Decades in the Rap Game
Few have shaped modern-day rap aesthetics like Mobb Deep. Havoc and Prodigy tell the tale of their journey through hip-hop’s mean streets in this edited and condensed version of their 2013 Red Bull Radio Fireside Chat with Chairman Mao.
Obviously you’ve been in this game for a number of years. What are your earliest memories of how you got into hip-hop?
Prodigy
What sparked my interest in hip-hop was listening to Run–D.M.C.’s “Sucker MC’s” and LL Cool J’s “Rock the Bells.” When I heard those songs and people like Schoolly D, it was over after that.
Havoc
Definitely what sparked my interest in hip-hop was just growing up around it. That’s all they played around my way, Queensbridge Projects. We had Marley Marl living out there, Roxanne Shante, and seeing all those big superstars in one place with their fancy cars and all of that… That definitely sparked my interest, being from a place where hip-hop was really prevalent.
You come from families of entertainers, performers, and musicians. How did growing up in that family inspire you to be creative as a musician?
Prodigy
My grandmother had a big dance school called Bernice Johnson Dance School. My grandfather was a jazz musician, Budd Johnson, so I grew up going to my grandfather’s shows. My mom used to tell me stories about the group that she was in. That was an amazing influence on my life when it came to doing music. I wanted to be like Michael Jackson. I used to look up to Michael Jackson when I was a kid, and then I got into the rap thing and it was over.
You guys met at [High School of] Art and Design. What did you guys think of one another when you guys met?
Havoc
We was like a year in grade apart from each other. I would see Prodigy around, but I didn’t know him and he used to wear all this big jewelry like nothing short of a little Slick Rick, I kid you not. You could hear him coming down the hallway. I always used to be like, “Who the hell is that?” Word, it was crazy, just crazy. We had mutual friends, and we all became friends and then it just so happened he had the same interest that I had. It was rapping.
How do you remember meeting? What was your first impression?
When I first met Havoc he was in a fight outside of school.
Prodigy
My first impression of Hav was, “Oh, son is wild.” When I first met him he was in a fight outside of school. I was coming out of school, my man Black was supposed to introduce me to him. We were in photography class together. He was like “Yo, there’s another kid you’ve got to meet. He dope, he rap too. You should start a group, yo.” We went outside to meet and it was like a big fight outside the school so I go to look and Black like, “Oh, that’s Hav right there fighting!” Crazy situation, crazy situation.
So who won the fight?
Havoc
Who won the fight? I won the fight! It was one punch. First I missed and then I caught him again, boom. He was way bigger than me, but he was probably intimidated by all the people I was with. I’m pretty sure one-on-one he probably would’ve kicked my ass, but I won.
At first you were known as Poetical Profits. How did that become Mobb Deep?
Havoc
This guy Goody wanted to sign us. He was like, “Yo, but ya’ll got to change your name or whatever.” Me and P was brainstorming and we just came up with the name of a term that we used to use around the way. If we used to be rolling somewhere, to the movies or to a party, there’d be a bunch of us and when we would talk about it later we would be like, “Yo, we was mob deep.”
When did the group start to change to the Mobb Deep that we all know now as far as Havoc being the producer and with Prodigy more focused on the lyrics?
Prodigy
A lot of the fans say that Havoc is the producer and Prodigy is the leader. It’s not even like that. To us, we just together. We Mobb Deep, Hav and P. I can understand maybe people got they opinions but we don’t look at it like that. That’s kind of weird to me because Hav’s nice with it. I gotta keep up with him and I’m sure he feel like he got to keep up with me. That’s how we feel about each other. People, they got their opinions.
That’s one of the cool things, is that you wrote verses for P on tracks.
Being around Nas, Cormega. I had to step my game up. I didn’t want them to be like, “P’s corny.”
Havoc
As far as writing is concerned, early on, we kind of used to write for each other. We were just starting out doing whatever, but when we did The Infamous – if I didn’t know any better – I would of thought somebody else was writing the rhymes because it was like a total 360. When I think back on it, I’m like, “Damn, how did he step his game up like that?” Incredible.
Prodigy
Thank you, brother.
Havoc
I’m serious, though.
It’s incredible on both of your parts. From Juvenile Hell to The Infamous. Talk a little bit more about that transition. Between Juvenile Hell, you guys lost the deal with Island, but you landed at Loud. How did that happen and how did you guys grow so much creatively between the first and second album?
Havoc
It all came from our backs being against the wall. We had a deal at a young age. We had all this hope of coming out, blowing up. We young, we made it, we got a little bit of money and then next thing you know, womp, womp womp. Everything happens for a reason. Then we got the opportunity to do The Infamous and our back was against the wall. It’s like do or die.
Prodigy
The way I stepped up my lyrics from I attribute to just probably being around my friends. Being around Hav, being around Nas, Cormega. I had to step my game up. These are my people, I didn’t want them to be like, “P’s corny, all right, let’s get out of here.”
Obviously “Shook Ones Pt. II” is one of the greatest, everybody’s favorite. What was the process in making that song work?
Havoc
It all stemmed from the first album Juvenile Hell not doing well, us getting the next deal, and Loud Records giving us our own creative control. Basically, we moved all the equipment from Long Island to Queensbridge and just camped out. A whole bunch of 40’s in the room, friends coming up listening to our music. Most of the time everybody was going out, and I was staying in just making beats and I made the “Shook Ones” beat. I really didn’t think too much of it. I actually probably would have turned the machine off because nobody was there to criticize it or say it’s dope. P heard it and thought I was crazy. He was like, “Everybody was like, ‘This beat is crazy.’” I didn’t think it would ever turn into what it did. It’s kind of a miracle. I still love the song to this day. I know some people try to be humble, but I love that song.
P, do you remember what was going through your mind when you were writing to this beat?
Prodigy
I was probably just trying to prove a point basically. Trying to show people that we deserved this. We deserve this, we work hard for this. It’s lucky we got a second chance to even get another deal. We were like, “No, we not going to lose this, we going to take advantage of this opportunity. We going to seize this moment and we going to have a career for ourselves.”
What was the difference in working on Hell on Earth versus The Infamous? You had this chip on your shoulder with The Infamous. What did you want to do with Hell on Earth?
Prodigy
I believe that by time we got to Hell on Earth, we were at the point where we were comfortable. Like not comfortable, but we got our footing and we were good. Now we can relax and be ourselves and just really put our pain and our struggle and everything into the music. That’s the kind of album it is. It’s a dark album. We was going through a lot around that time. That right there was just us really being like, “Yeah, we here now. Now, let’s get started.” That’s what that album was to me.
You guys got pulled into this East Coast / West Coast thing for a little bit. What are your reflections now all these years later? What do you think about that time and being pulled into that?
Havoc
It was all kind of nonsense, but you just had to go with the flow. You had to represent your hood, your town, your state. Everybody was so passionate. I don’t even know what we had to do with it, but I guess we was like the top dogs, so they had to come for somebody and we held it down. But it wasn’t really about nothing. To me, it wasn’t... I ain’t want to go down that road or that path, I wanted to have the long career. I don’t want to be shook for going to another state. It was retarded to me. I didn’t like it. I’m just glad that it’s passed now.
You guys took some time off between Hell on Earth and Murda Muzik and a lot of stuff leaked out. Talk a little bit about the process of recording, and what kind of setbacks you had to deal with when that material got out there.
Prodigy
The process of recording that album, it was a long special process. We spent a lot of money on that album. We had fun. We made a lot of it in Miami and in Manhattan. They opened up the bank for us after we was successful with the first two. We really started getting some bread and we started spitting that flow, getting cocky with it. We stunned ourselves right there, word.
How did “White Lines” become “Quiet Storm”? “White Lines” was a solo record for you, and then became a Mobb Deep record and, obviously, a classic record.
I definitely think we’ve been blessed, our career is blessed.
Prodigy
When we were working on Murda Muzik, I was working on my solo project at the same time, and I had put one of my songs out on a mixtape and it started circulating. It started getting a lot of play in the clubs and after like a year it got even bigger. It was a slow process, it’s crazy. We were working on Murda Muzik and trying to figure out a single. Our manager at the time, Chris Lighty, he was like, “That song is dope,” and Hav was like, ”Yo, come on, we got to put that on the album, son.” That was a good vibe. That’s definitely God at work. I definitely think we’ve been blessed, our career is blessed. When we get that inspiration, it’s not only ourselves, it’s also God at work.
With Infamy you expanded your range a little bit with some of the songs on there like “Hey Luv” or even “Get Away.”
Havoc
Infamy is definitely one of my favorite albums. The sad part about it was that Loud folded afterward, so it kind of made it bittersweet. We worked really hard on that album. We had Ron Isley on the album, we had...
Prodigy
Mo.
Havoc
Yeah, Lil’ Mo on the album.
Prodigy
112.
Havoc
While we was making the album, we felt re-energized. How do you make an album after Murda Muzik? It’s hard to do. If you listen to it, you can tell we was trying to stick with tradition and make a dope album and not overthink it. That’s what we set out to do.
What was it like when Loud Records folded? That was your home base for many years, and where you enjoyed all of your success.
Prodigy
When Loud got bought by Sony, it was a crazy situation. Loud was definitely like a family, man. The office, we’d go up there and chill. Dudes used to play basketball together, smoking and throwing it down in the office. Everybody was friends, going to parties together and stuff like that, traveling. When they was sold, it was definitely a little bittersweet. Word, I can’t front. We didn’t really know what our next move was going to be. We were trying to plot our next move at that time. We definitely wanted a fresh start. We hired a good lawyer, and then we became free agents.
Obviously, you guys were able to regroup and move on. You then did Amerikaz Nightmare. You enjoyed a hit with Alchemy’s track, “Got It Twisted.” What was the transition like from Amerikaz Nightmare to linking up with 50 Cent?
Havoc
That just came out of nowhere. Totally unexpected, because Jive didn’t work out too well for us [with Amerikaz Nightmare]. We did well as far as moving units was concerned, selling records. We did our numbers like how we usually do, but I guess it wasn’t good for them and, again, we was without a deal. So the transition was real swift. 50 calls, OK, boom, now we’re chilling with 50, now we on tour for like four or five months out of nowhere, now we shooting like ten videos. There wasn’t even time to think. It happened fast. The ink wasn’t even dry, and we was doing a song. I liked it because I was like, “Oh, OK, this is how you do stadium, huh?” I liked it.
Prodigy
My favorite part about that transition over to the G-Unit deal was not only just building a relationship with 50 and them, but also the fact that we were able to experience all that on the next level. It was a crazy experience. So many different things man, so many different things. It was crazy.
What’s something about 50 that people don’t know that you found to be interesting or surprising?
Prodigy
One thing about 50 that’s cool is he’s down to earth. A cool dude you can talk to. He just real down-to-earth, cool people.
Going away for the years that you did, and coming back out now and being able to make music again, how does that experience inform your music now?
God tested us along the way for a long time, and we still here still doing music and, to be honest with you, I didn’t expect nothing less.
Prodigy
I think me going away to prison and doing three years and then coming home, I feel blessed that I’m able to jump back into the career that I had before I went to jail. A lot of people come home from jail and they can’t get a job. A lot of them homeless, they families turned on them because they was locked up. They were convicted for a crime they didn’t commit and exonerated later on and they families turned on them thinking they guilty and they raped somebody or killed somebody. People come home twisted from prison. I feel blessed to have a job to come back to and I can just hop right back in. But we worked hard for that too. We worked hard for that. We met God halfway and we always do. Word.
2013 is 20 years of you guys together. You’ve been through so much struggle and success. Why do you think you’ve managed to be able to stick together?
Prodigy
I think me and Havoc were able to stick together so long because we just had a great time growing up. When we was coming up, that’s a memorable time. The things we used to do, our life was too ill, man. I think we both recognize that.
Havoc
We had our ups and downs and things like that, but like P was saying, we had so much fun times, good times. Not so much to make it sound like a storybook or something like that. We had a lot of bad times. Our people was gone or lost or locked up. We just been through a lot together, so we know each other, we familiar, we built a career together, and we love the music that we do. We love music, period. God tested us along the way for a long time, and we still here still doing music and, to be honest with you, I didn’t expect nothing less. I kind of knew that we would be together for a long time. That’s just the bottom line.

---

Title: House Music’s Detail Shop
Author: Jacob Arnold
Date: 2014-09-22
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2014/09/house-musics-detail-shop

House Music’s Detail Shop
If you look closely at many of the most sought-after American deep house, ghetto house, and techno records, you’ll notice one thing in common – Mark Richardson’s initials, “MJR,” inscribed in the run-out groove. “Percolator.” “Dem Young Sconies.” Round Two’s “New Day.” They all came through Mark’s mastering studio. At the end of this month, Mark will finally retire, so we sent Jacob Arnold to a small town in Illinois to talk with the legendary mastering engineer as he closes up shop.
Among the corn and bean fields of Belvidere, Illinois, some 70 miles from downtown Chicago, in a windowless red metal barn by a flower-filled patch of prairie, Mark Richardson spends all day cutting lacquer masters for records – from noise and death metal to house and techno, all by artists he has never met.
As I watch, Mark moves smoothly around his Neumann VMS 80 lathe, cutting six sides of punk rock. As the finishing touch to each lacquer, he inscribes the catalog number and his initials, then blows away debris with a puff of compressed nitrogen. By his count, Mark has cut 14,500 records on this equipment (only a fraction of which are credited on Discogs) since teaching himself how to use it in 1988. At the end of September 2014, he will cut his last record.
Richardson, who is about to turn 59, was born and raised in Elgin, Illinois. At the age of 15, Mark heard Black Sabbath’s debut album at a cousin’s house. “That changed my life right there,” he says. A year later, he dropped out of high school. “[I] got into playing guitar with a few local bands and had some fun, but didn’t consider myself the best guitarist ever, so I got curious and interested in recording studios in my mid-twenties,” Mark explains. Initially he worked as an independent engineer. In 1988, though, he was introduced to Matt Harrington, who was preparing to open Session Masters. “We got to talking and a few months later he called me and asked me if I wanted to be his cutting engineer,” Mark recalls. Before long, Larry Sturm, a studio engineer whom Mark had worked with previously, approached Mark about cutting some Steve “Silk” Hurley and Jamie Principle productions on D.J. World Records.
After a few successful projects for Sturm, house music producers began seeking Mark out. At the time, he says, “It seemed like there was a club or a house record label on just about every street corner.” Over his years at Session Masters, Mark mastered records for D.J. International, Streetside, House Jam Records, and the Hot Mix 5.1
Asked to describe mastering to the layperson, Mark says to imagine an artist who builds custom cars. “Once you finish building that car, you need to send it off to the detail shop in order to get it shined up, looking and being as good as it can be,” he explains. “That’s what I do. I’m the detail shop for music.”
Mark receives music and then runs it through the Neumann console until it sounds good and is suitable for pressing on vinyl without distortion. In the ’80s, the music was delivered on tape, but that switched to DAT, then CD-R. Now artists just share their tracks with him online.
“I’ve always considered vinyl as a format to be a compromise, and not necessarily a good one,” Mark admits. “So what I’ve always strived to do with every record I’ve ever done is to come up with a way to get that person’s music onto the format without complications. And what I mean by that is distortion – added distortion of the format. Most people easily recognize something like that if they’ve listened to a lot of records as sibilant distortion. You’re listening to the record and the vocalist comes along with a strong ‘s’ or even a ‘t’ or a ‘p’... and you hear this nasty distortion there for a second.
“When I was a kid listening to records, I absolutely hated that,” continues Mark. “And so it’s always been my goal to get a record cut as loud as I can cut it but as cleanly as I can cut it, and that’s where the challenge has been.”
Once Mark has the mastering settings he wants, he takes a 14-inch acetate-coated aluminum disc and cuts the groove that will appear on the final 12-inch record using a synthetic ruby cutting head cooled by a small but steady stream of helium. This lacquer disc is then sent to the pressing plant, where it is coated with nickel to create the stamper that will press the final, commercial records.
In the mastering phase, Mark rarely uses any external processing. “I’m a firm believer in a minimal signal path,” he explains. “Less than one percent of the records I’ve ever cut have had any compression or limiting done in this stage.” One of the few non-Neumann components in Mark’s console is a pair of Orban 642B equalizers that he uses on less than five percent of his projects.
“I’ve always been very independent. I’ve never listened to anybody else,” Mark continues. “I’ve never taken any actual courses or had any college or technical training on anything that I’ve ever done in the audio world. It was just based on my musical background and experimentation and finding what worked for me.”
Mark has faith in the engineers at Neumann who designed the equipment he uses. “This is not a modified system. This is a stock system,” he reveals. “And almost all of them out there have been modified to some degree.” Mark believes his system was the last Neumann VMS 80 sold in the U.S., and the second-to-last worldwide.
About a year into Session Masters, Matt Harrington moved back to his hometown of Pittsburgh. Mark continued to run Session Masters until the backers, members of Harrington’s family, decided to close up shop. They ultimately offered to sell Mark all of the equipment. In October 1991, Mark and a couple of acquaintances from his years as a recording engineer opened Metropolis Mastering in the northwest side of Chicago.
Over the course of nine years, Mark cut countless iconic house and techno singles, including Cajmere’s “Percolator,” Paperclip People’s “Throw/Remake (Basic Reshape),” Chez N Trent’s Prescription Underground EP, Round Two’s “New Day,” E.R.P.’s E.P., Dopplereffekt’s Infophysix, Lidell Townsell’s “Nu Nu,” and Moodymann’s Dem Young Sconies. Mark also cut all of the records for Dance Mania, Relief Records, and 430 West, among others.2
Mike Taylor, who records as Disco Nihilist, has had all of his Construction Paper label’s singles mastered by Mark. “Back in the day, you either used Ron Murphy [in Detroit] or you used Mark Richardson [in Chicago],” Taylor explains. Taylor recalls looking at Mark’s list of clients on his website ten years ago and seeing a “who’s who of Detroit and Chicago.” Taylor expounds, “It [was] sort of a no-brainer to go to him.”
Taylor tried a well-known Berlin mastering house for his first record, but it took a lot of revisions to get the sound that he wanted. “They just didn’t know how to deal with a really shitty, broke-ass Midwestern house or techno record,” says Taylor. “[Mark] knows how it’s supposed to sound, because more or less his cutting helped define the way those records are supposed to sound.”
In the mid-’90s, Mark bought out his partners and became the sole owner Metropolis Mastering. “By ’94, ’95, ’96, that’s when the production, especially of club stuff, really went through the roof and I was doing a lot of decent numbers,” Mark recalls. “And then slowly I saw it go down and down and down. By 1999 or 2000, it was almost non-existent.”
In October 2000, Mark decided to move out of the city. He changed the name of his business to avoid confusion with Metropolis in London and a couple of other companies with similar names. Describing the process of coming up with “Prairie Cat Mastering,” Mark says it was “not too big of a stretch of the imagination” since he had “a five acre prairie out there and cats kept showing up.”3
Manufacturing vinyl records is still part art, part science. “Two or three percent of the time something will come up that needs to be addressed, either in the mastering, the plating, or the pressing of a given project,” Mark reveals. “That’s just the normal failure rate.”
Besides sibilance, deep bass is another source of cutting problems. “Excessive low frequency [can] cause skipping issues,” Mark explains. Long side lengths also require compromise. At 18 minutes per side, there aren’t any problems cutting LPs at a decent volume.
“Unfortunately the geometry which guides and rules the system runs into trouble when somebody wants to do a 24 or 25 minute side, because the starting point that we have to start the cut and the ending point where it has to finish is fixed,” Mark elaborates. “The only way that a longer side can be fit into the given space is for the volume to be reduced. That, in turn, will cause the groove width and depth, as it’s being cut, to be smaller.”
With more lines per inch and the side walls closer together, there’s more chance of a needle mis-tracking. Sometimes to fit a long side on an LP, not only does the volume need to be reduced, but the low frequencies have to be filtered. During the pressing process, a puck of vinyl with labels on both sides is squeezed at high temperature between two stampers. As the vinyl flows out toward the edges, it gets thinner. This is the area where there’s the most chance of surface noise being generated. To counter-act this effect, Mark doubles the lead time on club records to eight or nine seconds before starting the music. This also makes the records easier for DJs to cue.
“The truth is, the bane of my existence is turntables,” Mark complains. “Ninety percent of them are junk: are not calibrated properly [and] have a worn-out stylus and cartridge on them. In some cases [they] aren’t even sitting level or [they] are sitting on a piece of wood, and speakers are sitting on the same piece of wood, and they turn it up and they get actual feedback!”
Mark offers to let me see a record he has just cut under the microscope attached to his lathe. “You can see as I slowly spin the record, the changes in width and depth and the outer edges looking more saw-toothed,” Mark describes.
Oddly enough, Mark prefers digital music to vinyl. “I don’t listen to vinyl,” Mark admits. “I don’t like records at all. But I enjoy the challenge of making each individual project that I’ve done work, and I’ve been successful most of the time.” Mark’s approach to mastering hasn’t worked with every label or artist. But years ago, Mark stopped “losing sleep” over clients who decided to go elsewhere.
Mark has always worked alone. “I’ve never had a second engineer of any kind, and I was never really approached by anyone seriously about wanting to learn how to do what I’m doing,” Mark insists. “I’ve had one or two calls from kids right out of college, just calling around and asking, ‘Are you taking on anybody as a second?’ But none of them had what I thought was the conviction or the phone skills to convince me to let them come on out.”
While Mark’s workload dipped in the early 2000s, it picked up from 2008 until the present. In his busiest month, he cut 157 vinyl records. A number of factors led to Mark’s decision to retire. “In the last year especially, there have been problems with supplies in the blank lacquers that we use and in the cutting styluses that we use. And with the insanely busy pressing plant situation, it seems as though many, many more issues have been popping up at that level as well. That means lots of re-cuts are needing to be done, compared to how it used to be,” Mark explains.
While Mark has had a “decent working relationship” with pressing plants in the U.S. for many years, he thinks “right now there are two pressing plants in the country doing vinyl the way it should be done, and that’s it. And they have high minimums, they’re slow, and they’re expensive.”
On top of technical issues, Mark feels the challenges are becoming greater than the rewards. He wants to enjoy retirement without the self-imposed stress of turning projects around in two to three business days. “There’s no possible way I could have had the career I did, if it wasn’t for the unwavering love and support of my wife of 38 years, Carol,” Mark says. He is also grateful to Session Masters founder Matt Harrington for giving him a chance to cut records in the first place . Mark also mentions Matt Harrington’s father William, Christine Zach, and all of the clients who trusted him with their projects, as instrumental in granting him “the career in music he was lucky enough to have.”
When Mark is done mastering records for the week, he often settles in with a surround sound Blu-Ray of progressive rock. Lately he’s been listening to Porcupine Tree and Steven Wilson. “I still thoroughly enjoy music as much as I ever did on a personal level,” says Mark. “It’s always been a great way for me to lose myself.”

---

Title: Young Chicago
Author: Max Bell
Date: 2014-12-04
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2014/12/young-chicago-feature/

Young Chicago
Today, frost coats the flameless candles of at least one curbside vigil in Chicago. Countless denizens mourn the loss of friends and family slain in the city’s ceaseless crossfire. The endemic poverty of many African-American neighborhoods – partially a result of racist redlining by the Federal Housing Administration – has begotten such high levels of violence, both gang related and not, that Illinois representative Monique Davis asked the state’s governor to call in the National Guard in 2013. Two weeks ago, three men were killed and five were wounded in a series of weekend shootings in predominately black neighborhoods.
For those who’ve followed Chicago rap for the last 20 years, the piercing Greek chorus of gunshots and sirens is saddening but unsurprising. (See the early records of rappers like Common, Twista, and Crucial Conflict, who chronicled the warfare in their neighborhoods in the ’90s.) Yet over the past three years, national press coverage of the escalating violence in Chicago has, for the first time, coincided with a keen interest in Chicago rap, or at least one branch of it: drill.
Everybody has their own style now. They don’t all rap like Keef no more.
Bred in the city’s most dangerous Southside neighborhoods, drill is a direct descendant of Atlanta’s trap rap. Though the subgenre has no specific sound, punishing percussion akin to the sound of semi-automatic weapons and sparse, ominous orchestration are frequent. More common are the fatal (and fatalistic) lyrics, the localized slang, and the chilling temperament. Still, to say drill rappers only glorify the gangster rap triumvirate of guns, drugs, and gang violence isn’t entirely accurate. These are realities they claim to have known their entire lives. The music is engaging for this ostensible authenticity and terrifying for how little the narrators appear to be terrified.
Though some news outlets correlated rising body counts in Chicago with the rise of drill, major labels weren’t deterred. After Interscope signed drill superstar Chief Keef in 2012, other imprints followed suit. Epic signed King L; Def Jam signed Lil Durk and Lil Reese. However, roughly two years later, Keef is the only one to release his commercial debut. This October, he was dropped from Interscope.
“That drill shit over with. Everybody has their own style now. They don’t all rap like Keef no more,” says Chicago rapper Lucki Eck$, whose murky, psychedelic Body High mixtape examines the line between powerful pusher and powerless fiend. “Chicago evolved. The music is better now. They just don’t realize it. They’re so stuck on all that violent shit.”
Even without this year’s XXL Freshman issue, the most visible envoys of that evolution are obvious: Chance the Rapper and Vic Mensa. Chance the Rapper’s 2013 mixtape Acid Rap, full of unwieldy wordplay, incisive social commentary, and production that fuses a mélange of disparate genres, garnered widespread acclaim and led to sold out shows across the U.S.; Mensa’s near equally heralded INNANETAPE, released that same year, enabled him to license his deftly executed hip hop-meets-house single “Down on My Luck” to Virgin EMI.
[Lyricist Loft and YCA] was like a training camp almost.
Both rappers remain in the spotlight, but this year has seen a proliferation of powerful and promising music from likeminded, hometown peers: Lucki Eck$, Mick Jenkins, Saba, NoName Gypsy, Max Wonders, Jean Deaux, Dally Auston – the list goes on. With singular sonic aesthetics, dynamic and often poetic deliveries, and unique, insightful perspectives on problems both personal and societal, they’ve elevated Chicago rap to creative heights previously unseen. Their emergence, in conjunction with the ascendance of drill, can only be called a Chicago rap renaissance. Currently, they are among the most important young voices in their city and the genre.
To believe this recent wave of talented Chicago rappers is purely coincidental would be foolish. Websites Fake Shore Drive and Ruby Hornet, both invaluable resources for Midwestern rap, were among the first to bring them to the attention of those outside of the city; but there was a time before the blog buzz. While drill rappers filmed menacing music videos and signed record deals, the aforementioned MCs in the previous paragraph embedded themselves in a tight-knit rap community, one largely born out of two local, youth-oriented open mics: Lyricist Loft and Young Chicago Authors (YCA). “They are two central locations in the city that basically helped change the way the city functions. They had the hottest artists coming weekly,” says Saba, who delivered one of the best guest verses on Acid Rap. “It was like a training camp almost.”
Held on Wednesday nights at YOUmedia, a space located inside downtown’s Harold Washington Library, Lyricist Loft saw hordes of young rappers and poets (and their peers) in attendance. Among the hundreds present each Wednesday were standouts like Mensa, Chance, Jenkins, and Saba, who hit the stage to freestyle and test their latest material.
The same was true at YCA, which takes place on Tuesdays in Wicker Park and was run by Kevin Coval, a Chicago raised poet/author and co-founder of Louder than a Bomb, the world’s largest youth poetry festival. In addition to booking early shows for rappers like Chance and Saba, Coval’s instruction has no doubt informed the more poetic aspects of the music.
“I would just encourage rappers to concentrate more on the craft, and for poets to also really garner from the culture of hip hop those aesthetic innovations into their practice on the page,” Coval says. “So those blurring of lines in some ways is intentional because it’s just what was in the mix.”
There was that moment before Saba’s tape dropped where he would bring in new verses from that project and people would be like, “Oh shit!”
For all who attended, YOUmedia and YCA were creative havens outside of home and high school, places to rally around a shared interest with people their age. And, crucially, the open mics were the first time they had ever performed in front of a crowd. “As a rapper who has nothing – not a fan, not a mixtape, not anything – when you go to a place like that with a bunch of opportunity there you’re going to continue to go and try to take advantage of everything that’s in front of you,” Saba explains.
In some cases, poets and other attendees took notes and began rapping themselves. “I was just really inspired by what they were doing with language and with rap,” says NoName Gypsy, who originally attended both open mics as a spoken word poet before turning to rap. Though she’s released little material since her appearance on Acid Rap, her forthcoming debut mixtape, Telefone, remains among the most anticipated releases from the Chicago scene. “The way they would tell stories and freestyle was very hot to me.”
Gypsy’s words offer some insight into the proceedings at both spaces, but Coval perhaps best captures the weekly atmosphere of YCA, and, by extension, Lyricist Loft. “There is that constant excitement and enjoyment that comes from seeing people grow and emerge… [T]here would be this almost this tangible vibe, the excitement about what NoName might bring this coming week,” he says. “There was that moment before Saba’s tape [Comfort Zone] dropped where he would bring in new verses from that project and people would be like, ‘Oh shit! This is really coming together.’ For me, I think week to week, it’s the most exciting cultural space in the city.”
If either Chicago open mic event has a clear rap antecedent, it is Los Angeles’ Good Life Café. In the early ’90s, while much of the press surrounding L.A. focused on the police brutality, the gang rivalries, and the funk-inflected gangster rap born out of those harrowing happenings, a group of highly literate rappers attended the Good Life each week to freestyle and perform. (It’s also rumored that rappers like Ice Cube and Bone-Thugs-N-Harmony dropped in and adopted the innovative vocal deliveries on display.) For evidence of the talent once housed under the roof of the small health food store, you need only listen to the work of seminal L.A. underground rap groups like Freestyle Fellowship, the Pharcyde, and Jurassic 5, all of whom had members in regular rotation there.
I know drill people. I know that life. I grew up next to those people... We just make different music.
The parallels between the current climate in Chicago and that of ’90s L.A. – the varied rap styles, the gang violence, and the media coverage – are easy to make. Back then, many attempted separate to those who made gangster rap from their Good Life counterparts, to make it seem as if they were from entirely different worlds. However, a majority of those on stage at The Good Life were raised in the same neighborhoods as N.W.A. Today, the same is true for many of the Chicago rappers who commuted to the open mics in downtown and Wicker Park. “I know drill people. I know that life. I grew up next to those people,” says Mick Jenkins, who’s impassioned, jazz imbued 2014 mixtape The Water[s] will probably make many year end lists. “I don’t really try to separate myself from them. We just make different music.”
His thoughts eerily echo Freestyle Fellowship’s DJ Kiilu, as told to Brian Cross in 1993’s It’s Not About a Salary: “[We] may have gone to different clubs, but we know guys like Ice Cube, we know gangsters, Crips, Bloods, dope dealers. We live in the ghetto, we didn’t grow up in Beverly Hills, it’s just that we heard something different.”
Still, some have used the words “non-drill” to label the music made by Jenkins and other Chicago rappers of his ilk. Though this is apt to a certain extent, the subject matter of drill rappers and their “non-drill” counterparts is often the same. The former are ostensibly on the corner, the latter are watching life on that corner and analyzing it. It is the shift in perspective that defines their division.
Unfortunately, like the Good Life before it, YOUmedia’s Lyricist Loft is no more. And while many of the rappers mentioned here are either too old or too busy to attend YCA, the open mic continues to grow and evolve. “YCA, when I started going there, was a lot more poetry based,” NoName Gypsy says. “Now YCA is way more rap based. The ratio between rap and poetry now, after all these rappers have started getting bigger, is really interesting.”
In addition to shaping the work of many of the rappers mentioned here, these foundational open mics created a dialogue and kinship between artists from the city’s various rap crews and collectives: Treated Crew (Wonders), Save Money (Chance, Mensa, Auston), Pivot Gang (Saba), Free Nation (Jenkins). Now, the number of collaborations between members from the different crews is too high to count.
“You see everybody all the time,” Jenkins explains. “You kind of record in the same three places, so people run into each other all the time.” Among those recording studios are Classick Studios and Soundscape Studios. The latter belongs to Closed Sessions, Chicago’s most prominent independent hip hop label, which was co-founded by the former EIC of Ruby Hornet Alexander Fruchter. While local rap labels like Molemen Records have existed since the late ’90s, Closed Sessions is the first to embrace these new artists on a local level.
That said, a majority of Chicago rappers still largely record in home studios. Saba’s open room basement studio has become a second creative breeding ground of sorts. NoName Gypsy, Lucki Eck$, and Dally Auston all record there regularly. It’s also where Saba recorded most of his Comfort Zone mixtape, arguably one of the best rap mixtapes of the year, both for its lush, piano driven instrumentation and penetrating lyrics. “We record in some of the bigger studios every now and then, but the most organic shit that we make still comes from the basement,” he says.
Of late, Saba’s work and that of those who attended the open mics, has undoubtedly influenced younger Chicago rappers. “I just kind of jumped that bridge [of going to the open mics] and went straight into trying to record and learning how to self-record,” says 17-year-old Max Wonders, who released his promising sophomore mixtape The Wonder Tape earlier this year.
Sadly, despite the rebirth of Chicago’s rap scene, history remains cyclical. Like Kanye West, Common, and Chief Keef before them, Chicago’s rising rappers have already begun to move away from the city (i.e. Chance the Rapper and Max Wonders). Saba, NoName, and Lucki Eck$ all plan to move in the near future. “We don’t have a [major] label out here. We don’t have a big press syndicate. Our radio is not what New York radio is,” Jenkins explains. “There are just a lot of reasons for n**s to leave,”
When friends are too busy, that’s always a beautiful thing.
One could argue that the moves might lead to the dissolution of this creative community, but others have a more positive outlook. “This is more like a life question than a Chicago rap question. Once you hit a certain age you have friends that you don’t talk to for years. But sometimes when y’all get up, it’s still like nothing changed,” says Saba. “So that’s a part of life. It’s a good thing though. When friends are too busy, that’s always a beautiful thing.”
For now, all Chicago rappers seem busy. Despite being dropped from Interscope, Chief Keef recently released two mixtapes. Lil Herb’s Welcome to Fazoland is one of the strongest rap records of the year, drill or otherwise. Saba opened for A$AP Mob on the final night of Red Bull Sound Select’s 30 Days in LA concert series and plans to release new material in coming months. NoName Gypsy’s Telefone is due out any day, and Jenkins signed with independent label Cinematic Music Group. Jenkins plans to stay in Chicago, to find solutions to the problems facing his community, and to use his growing influence to fortify the future of Chicago rap. “You’re only going to keep getting introduced to dope artists. They’re going to have a platform because we are all friends. We’re not going nowhere,” he says. “I don’t what [the future is] going to look like, but it’s going to be bigger.”
Header image © Red Bull Sound Select

---

Title: Members of the House: The Greatest House Music Band That Never Happened
Author: Ashley Zlatopolsky
Date: 2014-12-19
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2014/12/members-of-the-house-interview/

Members of the House: The Greatest House Music Band That Never Happened
It’s their first time together in a room in nearly 15 years. “Members of the House was the greatest house music band that never happened,” says Bill Beaver. He’s one-fourth of the core unit started by Mike Banks, which evolved from a wider collective also under the Members of the House name. It’s hardly remarked upon these days that Mike Banks was involved with euphoric house music at one point. The legacy of Underground Resistance is, of course, one reason. But it’s also because Members of the House only put out a few records and did one single European tour, drawing thousands of fans a night – and then it was all over.
In a series of interviews, three singers of Members of the House – Bill Beaver, Hassan Watkins, and Quentin McRae (Randy “Paul” McKaskill is absent) – tell the story of how Members of the House became almost an overnight sensation in Europe and fell out of the spotlight just as quickly. Also joining are producers Derwin Hall (D-Ha) of Happy Records and Gerald Mitchell of Los Hermanos, plus Mike “Agent X” Clark, who assisted in the studio.
Bill Beaver
Mike Banks came up with the name.
Derwin Hall
There was a group “Members of the House” before the four-core. It was a revolving lineup. But Members of the House blew up when those four – Paul McKaskill, Hassan Watkins, Bill Beaver and Quentin McRae – got together. It broadened the flavor of the music.
Bill Beaver
The original group included Niko Marks, Yolanda Reynolds, Scott Weatherspoon, Avery Midnite, Crystal Gaynor, Bridget Grace, Tunesia Fowler… lots of cool, cosmic cats came through [Mike Banks’] basement. We all knew each other through backyard parties and grapevines.
Hassan Watkins
When Members of the House first started, it was like a Berry Gordy-type production Mike Banks put together. He had all of these different fellas in it – D-Ha [Derwin Hall of Happy Records], [Mike] Clark, [Gerald] Mitchell [of Los Hermanos] – everybody involved making music. He brought in a bunch of vocalists and I was one of them. They did a compilation album in 1987 and I was the last guy on the album. It was called Keep Believin’. It was my first time doing house music; I was a soul singer from the street who dabbled in church music.
Mike Clark
I first heard [1988’s] “Share This House” and I was like, “Mike… are you doing house music?”
Quentin McRae
I kind of liked “Share This House” and that was before I knew anyone involved. But then I met the guy putting it together – Mike Banks – and he was like, “Well, I’m making this group called Members of the House. I want you to come sing for us.”
Derwin Hall
Mike [Banks] was the orchestrator. The way I came in to it was when I was over at Mike Clark’s house. He was DJing and he said, “Man, I got somebody I want you to meet.” Never put out a record or anything like that before; I was getting ready to go to law school. But then I met Mike Banks.
Hassan Watkins
From there, it just grew. Mike [Banks] started grabbing different artists, like Bill [Beaver] and Paul McKaskill and Quentin McRae. We blew up. We toured everywhere – all over the country, out of the country… Scotland, England, Canada. We played Joe Louis Arena with Inner City.
Quentin McRae
It went from being a compilation/production company to us putting out a record called Reach Out for the Love as Members of the House.
Derwin Hall
My talent at the time was arranging vocals and writing. Members of the House was originally on Underground Resistance, but then Mike [Banks] and I started Happy Records, and that was their new portal. Members of the House made Happy Records a vocal label and an outlet for house. UR was a techno label and they were putting out house records, so we had to separate the two.
Hassan Watkins
If you go back and listen to our music, we were doing gospel-style harmony chords on top of house, fusing it. We had stacks of harmony, but then we kept unison on everything. That made it gospel-like. We were, at the time, a perfect gift for house music. I believe Mike [Banks] took four gifted folk, blended us, kind of made it almost like a basketball team… then pulled back all of that to make us one. The only group close to making that sound back then was Ten City. They were making harmonies out of Chicago.
Bill Beaver
Everybody in our group was writing songs [at Mike Banks’ house]. If you were hitting your notes wrong, Mrs. Banks would come from upstairs and say, “I don’t know what Michael got you doing down here, but it ain’t soundin’ like the harmony is right.”
Quentin McRae
Sometimes we would conceive songs in my car. We used to sit there and just create harmonies.
Derwin Hall
Jeff [Mills] and them would compile the track, then we’d go and make a show version. We would edit their tracks and then Jeff and Mike [Banks] would mix them together, and that would create the show. The main producers were Mike [Banks] and myself, but Gerald and Derek Jamerson started producing, and Mike Clark, too. There were no computers back then. Everything was MIDI-chained.
Bill Beaver
Jeff Mills used to cut our tape down in the basement and edit it.
Derwin Hall
We recorded on that two-inch tape.
Mike Clark
Sometimes I would do the bassline or drum programs.
Hassan Watkins
When I left there, I really felt like I made something.
Bill Beaver
Actually, you felt like you did a workout.
Derwin Hall
Nowadays, if someone hits a note wrong, you can fix it. But sometimes that off-ness was what gave a song some life.
Hassan Watkins
My voice would crack all the time and Mike [Banks] would keep those cracks.
Bill Beaver
We were four areas of soul that came together, plus all of the brothers who gave us our focus. It took a lot of guys to make us four guys happen. It didn’t just happen like clockwork. It was cultivated.
When Members of the House came along, they ended up putting a face to house music.
Hassan Watkins
We were a group nobody had ever seen. We were four different guys with four different looks and four different voices. We had everything from the bass to the top first tenor. It was like the Temptations in a four-man group. We stepped and danced to everything we did. We were young and slim, stripping off our clothes… drove ‘em crazy. House music back then had singers, but they weren’t groups and they weren’t entertainers. We put on a full show.
Bill Beaver
We were like the Temptations of techno, or house. We did it just like the Motown guys did.
Quentin McRae
We put outfits together – white suits, turquoise suits.
Derwin Hall
That’s kind of what set Members of the House apart from everybody else. House music had always been a faceless music. You could listen to house music all night long, and no one ever knew the artist or the name of the song. When Members of the House came along, they ended up putting a face to house music.
Hassan Watkins
At that time, house music was still underground; you’d find it in buildings with strung-up lights. “Reach Out for the Love” was an underground track of ours only getting radio play on the weekends. WJLB had a Saturday night house mix – by Jeff Mills – and they were backing us. Before we knew it, we started hitting all these different charts.
Bill Beaver
We had Nicky Trax, Tony Cockrum, and John Truelove marketing our music overseas.
Quentin McRae
And React Music.
Hassan Watkins
Our distribution was coming through an entity of Sony, so that’s how we were able to reach different countries, too. And we were this close to signing with them. I still have the contract.
Bill Beaver
Then we got a tour. Before we did any shows, we rehearsed for a year-and-a-half.
Hassan Watkins
We practiced night after night, day after day. We had mirrors and we worked our butts off.
Derwin Hall
The show was tight and I have to give Banks credit for that. He was a drill sergeant and it benefitted everybody. We hated him for it, but we also loved him for it. That discipline he instilled taught us how to stay focused.
Hassan Watkins
When we got overseas, what blew my mind was the thousands of people who knew our record. They sung every word. Here [in Detroit], nobody knew our words.
Bill Beaver
We were in Brixton [London] walking to a little store. We looked at the magazine rack and we were in the fucking rack! Like, “OK, I guess we made it to something, fellas!”
Quentin McRae
We were at the newsstand and there was a Blues and Soul magazine with Vanessa Williams on the cover. I opened up the magazine and in the middle was this big huge picture of us. I was like, “Wow! Blues and Soul magazine is kind of big.” I didn’t think we were big.
Hassan Watkins
Our popularity shined brighter overseas.
Quentin McRae
We did our first interview at KISS-FM in London. On the spot, we did a jingle.
Bill Beaver
I found out that there were a lot of kids who studied our music in Manchester. Our stuff was in their crates.
Derwin Hall
Here [in Detroit], house music was more homegrown. Family, friends, entourage. It’s still that way now… same with techno. You can walk down the street here and no one knows who you are, but overseas you get off the plane and they think you’re Bobby Brown.
Hassan Watkins
They thought we were New Edition!
Bill Beaver
One girl even screamed, “OH MY GOD, MICHAEL JACKSON!” And we were like, “No! There’s no Michael Jackson here!”
Hassan Watkins
We were playing everything from raves to arenas to airports. We actually played in an airport hanger. They turned the hanger into a big club. One time, they gutted out a movie theater for us, removed all the seats and made it a dance floor. We had this show at a pub in Scotland… as soon as we got there, the power went out. We thought we were done for, but the people wanted to hear their stuff. They were like, “Sing some a cappella! Sing some Motown!” So we did straight a cappella and crushed them. They ended up buying us pints of beer.
Bill Beaver
Hot beer, because they didn’t have any ice in the cooler and there was no power. Then the fans stole our clothes.
Hassan Watkins
One of the best feelings is when you’re a poor boy from Detroit and you’re growing up on Livernois… I’ll never forget when we were in Scotland and I looked around and it was so beautiful. The prettiest green, the prettiest blue. I said, “Wow. This is a long way from Livernois.”
Quentin McRae
We had shows with 5,000 people.
Bill Beaver
We met Boy George at one of the shows.
Quentin McRae
What tripped me out was that everything was totally paid for! We had drivers, we had cars. We stayed in the same hotel as the Beatles.
Bill Beaver
We did somewhere around 32 shows in one month [during our 1991 European tour]. We all got sick after.
Derwin Hall
When we came back to Detroit and hit Soul Night, that gave us our crowd [back home]. Soul Night was at the State Theater (now the Fillmore). It was a wall-to-wall crowd, jam-packed. It was one of the only places in Detroit that got 2,500 people at a party…. That was the era when house music was the biggest that it’s ever been in Detroit. Then hip hop came and took us all the way out.
Bill Beaver
It was a battle on the radio between Eazy-E, the West Coast boys, and house music. WJLB used to play everything from rock to house to techno, Depeche Mode… it could be anything.
Derwin Hall
And then it got restricted. Something happened. Censorship was a big deal. That was when I first discovered the music business… those words should be reversed. It should be the business of music. The business overrode the music.
Hassan Watkins
Right after the first tour, we stopped touring. That was it.
Quentin McRae
We never got our second tour.
Derwin Hall
There were no more tours, but there were continued records for four or five more years. I think the last record came out in 1995.
Gerald Mitchell
So I got a question for y’all. Members of the House… why can’t that get back together now?
Derwin Hall
Could it happen again?
Hassan Watkins
I definitely think it could happen again ‘cause Bill and I never really stopped. I mean, we went our separate ways, but we kept doing music.
Derwin Hall
I don’t think you can recreate Members of the House, though. It’s like buying a really fine painting and putting it on the wall. You can try to recreate it, but it won’t be the same thing. You can get that same artist to do something new that will be just as beautiful, though.
Bill Beaver
We’re only as good as our next record.
Photos courtesy of Hassan Watkins

---

Title: The Nite Owl Diner’s Chrissy on the Evolution of His Music and Chicago’s Dance Scene
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2016-10-25
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/10/chrissy-on-chicagos-scene/

The Nite Owl Diner’s Chrissy on the Evolution of His Music and Chicago’s Dance Scene
Chrissy is a genre-bending DJ/producer with productions on esteemed labels like Classic, Freerange, Razor-N-Tape, Tugboat Edits and Hypercolour. He co-runs The Nite Owl Diner label with Alex Burkat, holds a DJ residency at the legendary Chicago nightclub Smart Bar and is one half of the disco group Chrissy & Hawley.
In his previous incarnation as Chrissy Murderbot, he helped introduce the world outside Chicago to footwork music through his DJ gigs and releases on Planet Mu, Hyperboloid, Halocyan and others. Chrissy also organized the first international tour of footwork dancers, and ran the successful juke/footwork label Loose Squares. In this excerpt from his appearance on The Deepest Dish on RBMA Radio, Chrissy discusses his musical evolution and the changes he’s noticed on the Chicago scene.
Listen to The Deepest Dish on RBMA Radio every third Wednesday of the month at 11 AM EDT.
I’d always really been into disco and house and things that are a little more tied to R&B song structures. I wanted to move closer towards that. I started, frankly, just getting to a point where I ran out of ideas for instrumental music. All the ideas I’d have for songs would be for songs with lyrics. Why am I going to bang my head against the wall trying to write more tracky tracks when all the ideas I get are songy songs?
I kind of got tired of playing shows where everybody there was a straight 22-year-old male. Nothing against straight 22-year-old males. They’re welcome to show up to the party, but I just like a little bit of a mix. I found that I’m playing these jungle shows and there aren’t a lot of women coming. There aren’t a lot of gay people or trans people. A lot of them felt pretty overwhelmingly white, too.
I wanted to get back to events that had the diversity and feeling of togetherness and unity and acceptance that I grew up with at raves. Not this thing where it was this one, homogeneous mass of people, and if you played something that wasn’t the kind of genre they came for, they’d look at you funny, like, “Oh why isn't this jungle?” Or, “Oh, why aren’t you playing the dubstep record? We came to a dubstep show, and you’re playing something else. We’re going to get real upset about that.” I guess I [was] just writing whatever the heck I want to write. Trying to put myself into a position of alienating everybody who doesn’t like a bunch of genres so that then I can play shows for people who will let me play whatever the hell I want to play.
House music [brought me to Chicago]. I came up here without any real plan, strung together a part-time job to help pay for my crappy studio apartment and just tried to find all the gigs I could. It took a few years. I’d already had records coming out before I came here. I’d already toured in Europe, and had a little bit of a grounding to where, fortunately, some people were aware of my productions when I showed up. It was a little easier to get started out. Then, I met early on people who were in my same position of starting out and building up. I met The Black Madonna real early. We’ve know each other for about eight years. Met some other people. Garrett David, who is doing great things. Gosh, I met him when he was 18, 17 or something. And a lot of people in the scene here who have done some really cool stuff in the interim.
When we were all starving, deadbeat artists that no one had heard of, we all kind of met each other and started working on stuff. It took a few years. I’ve been doing the residency at smartbar for about two years now and that’s been going well. And before that I was playing wherever people would let me, stringing together gigs, putting out records, meeting people.
The creative community here I think is the best in the world. I love it so much, it’s so inspirational. I’m really happy that I came here.
I left Chicago because I was kind of feeling like I was at a point in my career where I wanted to go to another city, see what their scene was like, meet people, make some connections in a place with more of a music industry infrastructure than here. Because we’ve got all the best creative people but we ain’t got the record labels, we ain’t got the corporate dudes in the suits who give out big checks for, you know, putting your track in a movie or whatever. So I went to New York to try to get a bunch of them to buy me lunch, and so I went out and I did that. I was living in New York, I was enjoying it, I was having fun. There was a lot of stuff I liked about New York, a lot of stuff I didn’t like so much about New York.
There’s so many small labels that are here [in Chicago] that are just laboratories and they can do whatever they want.
And Marea, Black Madonna, she says to me, “I’m going to need you to move your ass back to Chicago and come be a resident at smartbar.” That’s a good enough reason for me, you know. I ain’t tied down to nowhere. I missed Chicago, so she gave me a reason and I came and did it.
I don’t see that there is a big record label infrastructure here. I think it’s all pretty much tiny indies. And that’s what makes Chicago so cool. It’s a cheap enough city that new artists can move here and develop as artists. Where I feel like New York is so expensive it’s hard to be there if you’re not established already. And there’s so many small labels that are here that are just laboratories and they can do whatever they want. They don’t have a lot of interference or influence from the corporate world. We miss out on a lot of opportunities because of that, and I feel like there’s not as much professionalism in the scene in Chicago, because there’s not people at a level above modeling professionalism. So I think traditionally there’s been a lot of people who didn’t really play fair, people who took money from artists, and obviously so many stories about the early days of house music that we don’t got to get into here.
I feel like that part, the lack of professionalism and honesty, I’ve seen really come around in the last few years, where you’ve got labels like Stripped & Chewed who really do right by their artists. I think Chicago has really come to a point where labels are starting to do right by their artists and be really by the book and legit.
