Red Bull Music Academy — Disco

Source: Red Bull Music Academy Daily (daily.redbullmusicacademy.com)
Citation Tier: 2 (established music publication)
Articles: 4

---

Title: Interview: G.I. Disco’s Kalle Kuts on How American Music Shaped German Pop Culture in the ’80s and Beyond
Author: Adam Wray
Date: 2013-09-25
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/09/kalle-kuts-gi-disco-interview/

Interview: G.I. Disco’s Kalle Kuts on How American Music Shaped German Pop Culture in the ’80s and Beyond
In conjunction with RBMA Radio’s September pop-up station in Berlin, this month we’re taking a deep dive into German music history. Yesterday, we took a look back at the venue that set the stage for Berghain, the world’s most revered techno club: Ostgut. Today, we present a chat with Kalle Kuts about G.I. discos in the ’80s – a phenomenon that shaped German popular music (and culture) for years to come.
There are few moments in recent history that remain undocumented. No matter how niche a movement you’re searching for, it’s unlikely that a detailed account is more than a few keystrokes away. Three years ago, while bonding over old records, Kalle Kuts (AKA Karsten Grossman) and Daniel W. Best realized they’d come of age in the thick of one those rare, yet-to-be told tales: the story of how US soldiers brought American club music to Germany, and in doing so had a lasting impact on German popular culture.
Though the history of American pop musical influence on Germany begins shortly after the Second World War, the G.I. Disco story starts in the early 1980s. West Berlin was dotted with clubs that were either operated or frequented mainly by American soldiers stationed in Berlin. They were known at G.I. or ami clubs, and for young Germans who wanted a taste of American culture, they were the place to be. Musically, they were unlike anything else Berlin had to offer, stewarded by American DJs versed in the latest techniques and armed with fresh vinyl not yet available in Germany. Grossman and Best would both fall in love with what they refer to as “soulful ‘80s club music”: the synth-infused, drum machine-girded funk, soul, and disco of the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Sadly, the ami club scene is remembered mostly for one tragic event: the bombing of a club called La Belle in 1986. The attack, allegedly backed by Qaddafi’s Libya, left two American soldiers and one Turkish civilian dead, and would lead to the US bombings of Tripoli and Benghazi less than a week later.
The G.I. Disco project, which includes regular club nights, two official compilations, a host of mixtapes and a museum exhibit at Berlin’s Allied Museum, aims to tell the whole story. (Grossman and Best’s sets focus primarily on the music of the ’80s, while the exhibition goes back even further to offer a thorough, fascinating look into German attitudes towards American occupation and how it shaped German popular culture.) We spoke to Kalle Kuts about coming of age in Berlin’s ami clubs and the genesis of the G.I. Disco project.
How did you become interested in this sort of American music?
When I was five or six I started taking piano lessons. When I was playing for fun, I found some blues, boogie-woogie stuff, and learned that I really liked that kind of music. When I started listening to music in a more concentrated way – you know, the first time in your life when you’re listening to pop music radio and recording it – I found out I was really into soul, funk, all of that. When I was, I don’t know, 11, 12, something like this. Early ’80s. At that time, the only radio stations that played this music frequently in Berlin were the American Forces radio, AFN [American Forces Network], and the British radio, BFBS [British Forces Broadcasting Service]. That was the first time I came into contact with this kind of music.
You grew up in Berlin?
It was like the whole American lifestyle was represented through the soldiers in the town, and, of course, the music on the radio.
I was born and raised in West Berlin. So, for me, it was always a normal thing having the divided city, having American and British soldiers. Even before this music thing, the American soldiers had a huge influence on the lifestyle. It wasn’t like in other German cities where they had the barracks outside of town. They were present all the time. The guys, they were really cool. They had low-rider cars with the tinted windows, bumping loud hip hop. German regulations wouldn’t allow a German car like this, but they could do everything with their cars because they were Americans. It was like the whole American lifestyle was represented through the soldiers in the town, and, of course, the music on the radio. When I started going out clubbing in the early, mid-’80s, of course the G.I. clubs were the clubs with the freshest music. They were the places where I saw DJs scratching for the first time, and rapping. That’s where you heard the new music first.
Which clubs were you going to?
Of course, I was going to German clubs that changed their music programming in the middle of the ’80s. It was common sense, playing hip-hop, funk, house. But the GI club I liked most was called Chic, like Nile Rogers. This place was a small club, but it was like a piece of New York in Berlin. The DJs were really state-of-the-art, and they played the freshest sounds. They had a wall with mirrors.
And these were American DJs that were playing?
The only chance to listen to this music when it came out was going to a club, or having a hook-up to the American army so you were allowed to shop at the PX store.
Oh, yeah. Most of the Germans DJs learned from going to [GI clubs]. If you talk to electronic DJs, a lot them really got into DJing from going to those clubs. So, actually, you must picture this: those clubs were mostly frequented by black soldiers, and they’re bringing all the new dance moves from the States. Lots of white girls interested in meeting those black guys, and those black guys interested in meeting those white girls. Then Afro-Germans, there was a very small Afro-German community back then. Then there were some white boys like me who were just happy to gain admission at all, and check what the DJ was doing.
What was exciting about those clubs?
It was the music. Back then, of course, there was no Internet. You only had the chance to listen to new music on the radio. On AFN, you had soul, R&B, Top 40. They played some of the stuff, but not the really cool stuff. That meant you had to go to a club to listen to this music. The Americans, they always had the records first. Maybe some weeks later you had a chance to get them as an import at a German record store, but the only chance to listen to this music when it came out was going to a club, or having a hook-up to the American army so you were allowed to shop at the PX store.
You see a video – I mean, there weren’t many music videos back then, but you see Chaka Khan’s “I Feel For You,” with Grandmaster Flash scratching, or you see a little bit later “Paid in Full” by Eric B. and Rakim, and say “Damn, I wanna dance to this,” the only chance was to go to a G.I. club. And if you want to buy the record, you gotta wait ‘til the German stores get it and you gotta be there on time, because there are probably not many copies.
You’ve mentioned going to Chic – could you talk about some other clubs that were important at the time?
One club you for sure have to mention is La Belle. La Belle was a little bit more mainstream. La Belle had, like, red carpets. They had American DJs as well, but it was more big hit, disco-oriented. The audience was the same, but the place that really felt like a piece of New York was Chic. They had the best DJs, they played the coolest music.
Do you remember any of your favourite DJs from back then?
The guy from Chic who played the coolest records called himself DJ ET. He was an American GI. I don’t know what happened to him. The other guy was Steve Kostelac. He had a radio show on AFN called Star Patrol. That was, like, the number one disco show. Anyone you ask about those times will tell you Steve Kostelac was the shit. He had this radio show, and he DJ’d at Riverboat in West Berlin. He also DJ’d at La Belle. Steve Kostelac was probably the number one name in town. For me, personally, and the other music nerds in town, even if they didn’t know his name, it was DJ ET from Chic. There was another guy from AFN, he wasn’t a club DJ, but he called himself The Magnificent Magoo. He had this show called The Juice, and he played all that jazz-funk, slow motion soul stuff. His radio show was, like, the number one soul show in town. Those are the three guys that influenced the Berlin scene the most.
I want to talk about La Belle a bit more – the bombing seems like a hugely important event in this part of Berlin’s club history. Did the scene change after the bombing?
The La Belle bombing was like the beginning of the end.
Yeah, of course. Nobody expected something like that to happen. Of course, Americans were in conflicts all over the world, but it wasn’t like nowadays. Berlin still had this unconditional love for Americans, because they really freed us from this Nazi bullshit. They really saved the city during the blockade and everything. Especially in Berlin, everybody loved Americans.
We never pictured something like that could happen at a place like La Belle. You have to understand, most of the Americans that went there were black, and they mostly went to the army because they had no other job opportunities at home. You had some German girls, some music nerds like me. There were lots of Arabic, Turkish people there. Italians, Yugoslavians. That’s not the people [they] actually wanted to hit with such an attack. La Belle wasn’t even strictly an American club, it was run by an Italian guy.
All the clubs changed, they started having weapons checks and hiring more bouncers. The party went on, but it wasn’t the same. By 1989, the Wall came down, techno started, hip hop became huge, East Berlin was open, there was free space everywhere for illegal parties, and that cleared the whole West Berlin club scene. Not only the GI clubs, but the traditional, hip West Berlin clubs, too. They had no audience anymore. Everybody went to the East. So, the La Belle bombing was like the beginning of the end. It wasn’t just the bombing itself, though. For me, as a German kid, it had a worldwide political aspect. I can remember, I really felt afraid of something like World War III. America was bombing Libya only a few days later, you know? You know, they did the bombing, and that wasn’t cool, but now they’re bombing the whole city? I never thought that an underground club in Berlin would lead to worldwide conflict.
Do you think Berliners’ attitudes towards America started to change after this?
No, I don’t think it started then. For my parents’ and grandparents’ generation, they felt that America saved them from Russian influence, and, of course, from Nazi influence. For my generation, I was born in the early ’70s, I always felt cool with the Americans here. I was really educated politically. The German school system back then, you were really forced to learn about political systems and whatever. I knew what was going on in South America, but I was ambivalent. You had guys throwing stones at anti-US demonstrations during the daytime who were listening to AFN at night. It wasn’t as simple as pro-American or against.
Why is it important to remember this period of Berlin’s club history?
It wasn’t just a nostalgic thing to us. It really had influence on German pop music, youth culture, the whole pop culture since the ’80s, even ‘til now.
This was a natural part of my history, with music, with club culture, with DJing. That’s how I got in touch with soul, with hip hop. When we started this project, it was all about doing a party for all those people who felt like us. And we wanted to listen to those tunes, which they don’t play anymore. I did a mixtape like three-and-a-half years ago and we set up a party, and we had so much incredible feedback. Not only from people our age but also much older people that were like, “Yeah, man, I worked at the club that played that music,” and also from younger people, 23, 24 year-olds. So, we were like, it’s becoming a cultural mission. We did research, and found it hadn’t been documented. Before that, it’s all Berlin Blockade, fall of the Wall. We really felt responsible to do something because it wasn’t just a nostalgic thing to us, it really had influence on German pop music, youth culture, the whole pop culture since the ’80s, even ‘til now. Bands like Snap! or Captain Jack or even German hip-hop: It all started with this. We felt we had to do something.

---

Title: Five Jazz Records From Jameszoo’s Discogs Want List
Author: Jameszoo
Date: 2014-07-28
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2014/07/jameszoo-jazz-discogs/

Five Jazz Records From Jameszoo’s Discogs Want List
At times Jameszoo’s beats veer so far left of center that you could imagine them catching whiplash. It’s no surprise then that the Dutch producer has a special place in his heart for below-the-radar scale excursions. Ahead of his Friday set at this year’s Dekmantel Festival, which takes place from August 1st to August 3rd at Amsterdamse Bos, we asked the 2013 Academy grad to compile a list of underrated jazz records. The vinyl aficionado aptly resorted to his Discogs Want List to supply us with answers.
Carsten Meinert Kvartet - To You
This brilliant, impossible-to-find album is the work of Danish jazz genius Carsten Meinert. The record came out both on his own label and the renowned Danish Spectator Records (which went up in flames in 1972, three years after they started it). Spectator Records released some of the most beautiful jazz, prog and folk I’ve heard. It’s probably because I can relate to their peculiar way of talking and of course their love for Flæskesteg. Do yourself a favor and also check out some of the other stuff Spectator released, like Tordenskjolds Soldater’s Peace record.
Bobby Cole - A Point of View
One of my favorite crooners. Armed with an extraordinary whiskey-tobacco-blend voice, Bobby sings about stuff that goes great with, indeed, whiskey and tobacco. But it goes perfect with tea biscuits and ginger beer as well, I noticed. The way he sings is not over-the-top stylistically perfect. It has some gentle edges. I have a spot reserved for this record in between my Steve Kuhn collection and the Erroll Garner section.
Barney Willen - Moshi
The artwork kind of already tells you that this record is at least gonna be interesting. The French truly have a fine taste for cover art, between this and covers like the one for the Full Moon Ensemble or Steve Lacy’s Lapis. Barney’s record is full of amazing, sonically interesting stuff accompanied by great musicianship. Barney made some more stuff which is really hard to find. For instance, if you see this record called Zodiac at a local flea market, keep cool and instantly swap your nickels and dimes for that blissful recording.
Comus - First Utterance
In its essence, this is prog folk but definitely with a certain jazz to it. The changes and switches in these tracks are mind-blowing. I was never much of a folk guy, but this record really got me. It feels free in more than one way. I feel like this could be the soundtrack to life, or at least that day where you find out how great ossobuco is. Imagine The Residents singing by a campfire, accompanied by a few guitars and a rhythm section tighter than a monkey’s fist knot. A brilliant record!
Amado Maita - Amado Maita
This self-titled piece of heaven contains one of my favorite sambas, “Samba De Amigo.” I’ve seen this record go for the price of a year supply of Yerba Mate before, and I really need my calabash to be filled, so I kinda gave up on this one. His voice is truly convincing and beautifully recorded. The instrumentation reminds me a bit of how Arthur Verocai did it also back in 1972. Brazil at its finest.

---

Title: Five Prog Records From Jameszoo’s Discogs Want List
Author: Jameszoo
Date: 2014-08-08
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2014/08/jameszoo-prog-discogs/

Five Prog Records From Jameszoo’s Discogs Want List
The Dutch collector reveals a few pieces of prog vinyl he’s lusting after.
At times Jameszoo’s beats veer so far left of center that you could imagine them catching whiplash. It’s no surprise then that the Dutch producer has a special place in his heart for below-the-radar scale excursions. Which is why we asked the 2013 Academy grad to compile a list of underrated prog records. The vinyl aficionado aptly resorted to his Discogs Want List to supply us with answers.
Moving Gelatine Plates - The World of Genius Hans
This French band’s name is a brilliant description of a fairly delicate process, but what is even more brilliant is their album The World of Genius Hans. These youngsters were apparently performing their Canterbury-influenced pieces on partly borrowed gear, having no more than a few nickels and dimes to their name. The lack of financial resources was the ultimate downfall of the band, but they left two great records to enjoy. So, the next time you’re eating this peculiar jelly made from hooves and bones, don't think about Dr. Oetker. Think about the Moving Gelatine Plates.
Kevin Ayers - Joy of a Toy
Kevin Ayers is the former Soft Machiner that recorded one of my favorite prog albums in the history of recorded prog albums. After touring quite heavily with the Machine, Kevin took his time to create this masterpiece. I’ve read a story that claims Hendrix was a big fan of Ayers, and gave him a custom Gibson guitar to encourage him to keep writing music after he stopped playing with Soft Machine. So, supposedly, it was just Kevin and one of the most expensive gifts that has ever crossed the big ocean (apart from the Statue of Liberty and the MPC I bought, which they should have marked as a gift to avoid custom taxes). Signed to Harvest EMI, Kevin went in the studio with a line-up that included his former band members to create this odd pop prog record about walruses and Disneyland.
Archimedes Badkar - Badrock För Barn I Alla Åldrar
Always finding myself a bit on the jazz side of things, I was quite captivated by the sounds of this Swedish Archimedes. It’s hard to put any label on this record, as it shifts around (in quite a professional way) between jazz, prog, fusion and more related genres. It was the song “Wago Goreze” that convinced me that I could put this record in the prog list. (According to Mr. Shakur only God can judge me, so if there is a prog god, please spare me and my write-up.) This record is something special, from the odd way of using percussion to the sometimes sparse instrumentation. The cover art looks like an ’80s cereal ad, and the group photo found on the back looks like the group photo of an anti-deforesting organization. Please take a listen while I bathe in the sorrow of not owning this bliss piece.
Room - Pre-Flight
With song titles like "Where Did I Go Wrong?,'' ''No Warmth in My Life'' and ''Cemetery Junction,'' Bath is not the group of guys you wanna get emotionally drunk with. Instead, just play the record and enjoy life at the same time. The vocals of Jane Kevern reminded me a bit of Triste Janero and other lightweight stuff at first listen, but there is an odd edge spread out over the course of the record. It feels more influenced by blues and psych records from across the big ocean than anything from Canterbury.
Virus - Revelation
As far as I can tell, Germans are mostly known for their stable cars and Bärenfang – which, incidentally, should not be mixed. There’s also the band named Virus. The group only made two records, and shifted the band members quite drastically in between those two recordings. While Thoughts is just as brilliant as Revelation, the latter has a great feel for track titles (“Hungry Looser” and “King Heroin” among them). This record kind of floats in between kraut and prog, fitting perfectly on your shelf next to Brainticket and your copy of Breathe Awhile by Arcadium.

---

Title: PAJ Disco: Pioneers of the Edit
Author: Dimitri Nasrallah
Date: 2016-10-28
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/10/paj-disco-mix-interview/

PAJ Disco: Pioneers of the Edit
Dimitri Nasrallah talks to Pierre Gagnon, one-third of the pioneering disco edit crew
PAJ Disco Mix was an unheralded force behind Montréal’s disco dance floors. In the mid-to-late ’70s, when famed Lime Light DJ Robert Ouimet needed an exclusive extended version of a club anthem, he turned to Pierre Gagnon, Allen Vallieres and Jean Barbeau for their peerless edit work. The trio was known to work intensively on songs, splicing and stitching reel-to-reel tapes hundreds of times over to draw out conspicuously loopy versions tailor-made to detonate dancefloors.
In the golden age of disco, the edit was not the semi-officially sanctioned remix it is today. Disco edits were destined to gather dust in the DJ booth after they had run their course on a club’s reel-to-reel machine, never to see release. That was unfortunately the case with PAJ Disco Mix, who made over 50 edits in their time together, reworking classic tracks by Salsoul Orchestra, Cerrone, Space and numerous others.
But PAJ Disco Mix’s attention to detail predicted the lengths that DJs would go to several generations later, once the edit finally gained traction as a viable form during the 21st century disco renaissance. From the loopy psychedelics of DJ Harvey’s Black Cock Edit Series to house music micro-splicers such as Akufen and Soundstream, PAJ Disco Mix’s detailed approach to the edit has proven itself to be the way forward in the laptop era.
As disco mega-collector Al Kent wrote upon discovering their treasure trove of work in 2010, “Given the period in which it was recorded, such brilliance resulting from a mastery of primitive tape machine technology can only be applauded.” Applaud it, we shall. In terms of exploring the possibilities of the disco edit, Montréal’s PAJ Disco Mix was there first. We sat down with Pierre Gagnon to talk about their largely undocumented story.
How did PAJ Disco Mix get started?
I met Allen in 1970, and I met Jean in 1974. I started because I was buying 45s, and there was this song in two parts – part one, part two, all instrumental on one side and the vocal on the other side. I wanted to join it together to make one song, and that’s how it started.
Allen was a drummer. He came out to the house, and we started doing mixes. It all started with cassette decks, pausing on cassette decks. Those mixes on cassettes, we got so good at them that we could do triplets. That means that when the song was playing, if we wanted to repeat a beat at 4, we could set the record to start playing right on the beat that we wanted to play. We paused immediately, repeated it another time, then a third time, to make a ta-ta-tum. We were able to do it on cassette with a pause button.
When did you first begin to get your edits into clubs?
We started going out at that time. I was 18, they were 17, and we used to go to the Lovers Disco Club in Laval. There was two clubs in Montréal. There was Lovers Disco Club, and there was the Lime Light. In ’76, we used to go the Lovers Disco Club.
At one point, we said, “Okay, we’re going to go to speak with the owner, not the DJ. We said to him, “We’re doing remixes.” He said, “Oh yeah?” We said, “We’re going to do it for you.” He says, “Do me a remix of all André Gagnon’s ‘Wow’ and ‘Surprise.’” Two instrumental songs, but in a disco style. So we made it for him, and our edits started playing on the radio because the Lovers Disco Club was playing on the radio.
It was our mix that was playing on the radio. The show was one or two hours per week, but they made sure they played that because they were the only ones to have it. It started like that.
How did you connect with Lime Light DJ Robert Ouimet?
We did a remix of Bumble Bee’s “Love Bug.” In June ’76, we went to the Lime Light on a Saturday night, nine o’clock at night. We go see Robert, give him the cassette. He played it. He said, “Oh.” But it was on cassette. The sound wasn’t good enough to play.
Robert said, “It’s good what you’re doing. You should do a remix of Peter Gun and ‘Spring Rain.’” I bought the record. It was not available in Canada, so I called France. Five days after, we received five 45s. We did that, came back to Robert, and it was okay.
So we bought two reel-to-reel tapes. Jesse Green’s “Flip” was the first remix on the reel-to-reel where we’re splicing. We went to Lime Light, we gave the reel-to-reel to Robert. He started playing “Flip” in front of us. And when it started playing, everybody in the Lime Light starts screaming. After that, every time a PAJ mix started to play, everybody in the club starts screaming. It was always like that.
From January, we did for one year at least one remix a week. Jean was doing his own remix, I was doing mine, same with Allen, and sometimes we merge idea on one mix. But very often it was I do this one, you do this one, you do this one.
How did your edits find their way to North America’s DJs despite never being officially released?
Robert was a member of the New York Record Pool. Robert was going to New York every week. So when we started giving him the remix, he started bringing it to New York, and in New York he made copies of the tapes. So every DJ, every member of the New York Record Pool received a copy of our tape. After that, some of the most popular, like “Flip,” like “Freedom to Express Yourself,” those were made on acetate on Sunshine Records. So they distributed them.
In ’78, we went to the American Disco Music Award in Boston. We were very surprised. We were with Robert Ouimet. We arrived there. We’re in the lobby of the hotel where everybody’s speaking to everybody. The Village People were there, and everyone asks, “Who are you?” PAJ Disco Mix. Everybody knew us. The mouth-to-mouth had made its way. Also, there was the success of “Music” by Montréal Sound. Tom Moulton wrote a really good article on that remix. He said it was too much. It sold over half a million copies.
How were your disco edits different than the other edits and remixes that were being made in the ’70s?
I have listened to a lot of the stuff that DJs did at that time. In New York, so they either had access to the multitrack or they started to sample for rap. Here, we didn’t have that access. That’s what pushed us to redo music. Rewrite the music. Walter Gibbons never rewrote music by splicing, changing the time and repeat it to make a new melody. We used to do that.
They did maybe three or four splices in a remix. We, at that time, did 200 splices. We did all that only with the stereo track. That’s what forced us to develop the editing to the point that we think, today, that we were at the origin of sampling and looping, because we were the only ones.
In August ’77, after doing 40 remixes in six months, we said to ourselves, let’s do 1,000 splices in 18 minutes. One month later, we did 2,000 splices in 22 minutes. The 2,000 splices, on “PAJ 2000,” there’s a splice at every single beat. It was our experiment. Reverse a song. Rewrite the music.
Another experiment was to have instruments. Allen played drums and a bit of piano. We did a remix of “The Deep” with an old piano that I have at my house, and we recorded the piano on top of it. On “PAJ 1000,” there’s a section with Giorgio Moroder’s “From Here to Eternity.” We added an ARP synthesizer. We were always looking to try new things.
When you take a piece of tape and you cut it the way you want it, you can have different effect of sound because we starting cutting straight, cutting in angle, cutting sometimes four times for tempo in two. The left was separate than the left on another part. That’s starting to be crazy, because nobody is cutting tape like this.
Walter Gibbons, John Luongo, John “Jellybean” Benitez, François Kevorkian, those guys made editing, but they didn’t rewrite music with editing. That’s why we said that we are the ones who really started that, who made it so evident for people who had our music just to be inspired by this.
