Red Bull Music Academy — Techno & Detroit Techno

Source: Red Bull Music Academy Daily (daily.redbullmusicacademy.com)
Citation Tier: 2 (established music publication)
Articles: 6

---

Title: The Perfect Storm: New York Techno In The Early 90s
Author: Michaelangelo Matos
Date: 2012-09-13
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2012/09/new-york-techno

The Perfect Storm: New York Techno In The Early 90s
In discussions of the American legacy of techno, the focus is invariably on its founders in Detroit. Now that the US mainstream has begun to embrace electronic dance music, Michaelangelo Matos uncovers the forgotten history of the American rave scene, zeroing in on the moment when the British Summer Of Love found its way to New York. (For the accompanying video countdown guide of some of the anthems of this scene, click here.)
It was 1989 and Frankie Bones was looking forward to his first trip to England. Karma Productions, a crew in London that threw gigantic warehouse and outdoor parties dubbed ‘raves’, had offered the 23 year-old Brooklyn DJ a slot in the lineup for their July party, Energy Part 2. These things had gotten some media attention, both in the English music press (which had declared 1988 a ‘Summer of Love’ and were on their way to doing the same for ’89) and the broadsheets (thousands of kids dancing to faceless machine beats in fields: what?). But in America they were still a distant rumour.
Born Frank Mitchell deep in Brooklyn, Bones began by making freestyle and soon unleashed a flurry of house tracks under a variety of pseudonyms. The most successful was 1989’s “Just As Long As I’ve Got You”, credited to Looney Tunes, a collaboration with onetime rival roller-rink DJ Lenny Dee – born Leonard Didesiderio in Sheepshead Bay. “Just As Long” fit the hopeful vibe of England’s cresting rave scene.
“We were used to selling 3,000 to 5,000 units on our own,” says Bones. “Suddenly we were moving 10,000 units, and more than half were going to Europe. London was very interested in us.” Bones arrived in London anticipating 5,000 people. En route to the locale, someone handed him a pill. “I didn’t know what ecstasy was,” he told the rave zine Massive in 1995. “[We were] stuck in a traffic jam on a little country road with just two lanes and cars for miles.” As he came up on E, he heard one of his songs playing in another car, followed by another of his songs, playing in another car: “I pretty much lost my mind.” Ditto when the crowd turned out to be closer to 25,000: “That was probably my enlightenment.”
Bones’s 1989 “Call It Techno” was a mission statement: “It started in Detroit/But I’m out to exploit/The way I hear it.” Bones was ready to spread the word to music-loving outer-borough kids like him. He gave away promo mixtapes at south Brooklyn’s premier cruising spot, beneath the elevated train on 86th Street. Frankie handed out cassettes at spotlights to kids in passing cars with his younger brother Adam.
“He would make a speech at the beginning,” says Adam Mitchell, better known as Adam X (and, more recently, Traversable Wormhole). He imitates his brother’s cod-English accent: “Hello party people! I just came back from England! And I just experienced this thing, the rave!” Adam watched as his brother’s salesmanship paid off: “[We’d wait] 30 minutes and they’d be on the rebound. You’d start hearing LFO coming out of the car: ‘Cool. Got one.’”
On April 21, 1990, Bones opened Groove Records on Avenue U. “Other shops in New York were selling techno,” says Adam, “but they didn’t push it as a movement. My brother wanted to make a scene around it.” Soon after, Adam began working the counter, his brother returned from another trip to England. (“We were going back and forth, two weeks there, two here,” Bones recalls. “No recovery time, just a lot of non-stop flights and parties.”) This time, Frankie had some pills to share. Ten people gathered at the Avenue U store. “We pulled the gates down and turned the system up,” says Adam. “In an hour I was like, ‘Whooaa.’” So were the others. “The people in the group told their friends, I told my friends, and it spread like wildfire, the whole idea of it.”
“Parties were happening everywhere: at McDonald’s, in the subway, [in] diners. [It’s] hard to compare with the restrictive policy today.”
Pretty soon, Adam says, “We were doing 50 people in a gutted-out apartment on Coney Island Avenue. It happened so quick. By ’91, we were doing generator parties in the junkyards down by Foster Avenue, by the freight tracks, with 400 people showing up.” Bones began to call his parties Storm Raves. “By winter of ’92, Staten Island: 1,500 people,” Adam says. “By [autumn] ’92, we’re doing 5,000 people on Maspeth Avenue. That’s how fast it grew.”
“Parties were happening everywhere,” remembers Austrian techno producer-DJ Patrick Pulsinger, who moved to New York briefly in the early 90s and played regularly at the Limelight alongside another techno transplant, Detroit’s Jeff Mills. “At McDonald’s, in the subway, [in] diners. [It’s] hard to compare with the restrictive policy today.”
That raw energy transferred to the studio as well, and not just for Bones. Oliver Chesler was studying political science at SUNY Purchase when he went to his first raves; soon he befriended John Selway, a music-composition major. Together they made what Selway calls, “an epic rave overload – Euro-ravey, big chords, that early hard, dark sound.” Selway played it for his class.
“It completely blew away the whole class,” he says. “There weren’t actual letter grades, but I got a lot of props for that. I don’t know how much they liked it, but they were pretty impressed by the advanced-ness of it.” Another Brooklyn DJ, Jimmy Crash, issued the track – “Schizophrenic,” credited to Disintegrator – on his label, Direct Drive, in 1991.
New York rave’s biggest pop hit came courtesy of its biggest pop star, Moby, who spun at the winter ’92 Staten Island Storm Rave: “Go” reached No. 10 on the UK pop chart in October 1991. (He’d get even bigger with 1999’s bestselling Play.) But the most widely respected New York producer of the period was Joey Beltram, whose 1990 “Energy Flash” is one of techno’s most iconic records. So is “Mentasm”, from 1991, by Second Phase, aka Beltram and Mundo Muzique. That track’s ‘hoover’ noise was all over early-90s rave. One copycat track was “Tingler” by Smart Systems – an alias of Future Sound Of London. They made a similar noise rather than sampling Beltram, but Adam X then turned around and sampled “Tingler” for his own 1992 track, “Lost In Hell”, cheekily bringing things full circle.
Soon Manhattan clubs came calling. A London ex-pat, DJ DB, started a couple of nights; the one that clicked was NASA, every week at the Shelter from 1992-93. The big one was the Limelight, a deconsecrated Episcopal Church in Chelsea owned by Peter Gatien, whose other properties were Club USA, the Tunnel and Palladium. Promoter Michael Alig’s 1996 murder of drug dealer (and roommate) Angel Melendez, and the subsequent dismantling of Gatien’s New York club empire – the city of New York went after it, leading to years of legal hassles, followed by Gatien’s deportation to Toronto in 2003 – makes it easy to forget how central Limelight was to techno’s musical rise in New York.
Still, when Bones took the Storm Raves to Ninth Avenue near 13th Street in Manhattan on July 18, 1992, someone called the authorities, which then shut it down. “It was always suspected that the Limelight pulled the plug,” says Adam. “We stepped into their turf. Whenever we did a party when they did their club nights, we would empty their club out.” The same year, Bones was assaulted on a Sunday night near his apartment in Brooklyn. “These guys came up to him with bats and tried to kill him,” says Adam. The crime was eventually linked to Limelight promoter ‘Lord’ Michael Caruso. “Lord Michael [was] very Mafia connected,” explains Adam.
This was typical of New York nightlife’s Mob involvement. “Everything was controlled,” says Adam. “When we started doing Storm Rave, we had connections. We had to, because if we didn’t we’d get busted by the police.” During one party’s bust, Adam watched “these two Italian Mafioso guys” have a sit-down with a Staten Island club owner: “Like out of Goodfellas. Next thing you know, the [Mafioso] guys own the club. Straight up took it.”
The July 18 mishap was righted in spades two months later. “The most satisfaction I’ve ever [gotten was] the Storm Rave when we had 5,000 people in a truck loading dock in Queens [on] September 19, 1992, after previously getting shut down, losing $32,000, thinking the whole scene was over,” Bones told Massive.
But soon, the Storm parties were over. The final blowout was on December 12, 1992. Bones nearly missed it. “It snowed two feet from DC to Toronto on December 11,” he says; he took Amtrak for 16 hours to make the gig. Tommie Sunshine, now a DJ but then a well-known party kid from suburban Chicago, told Montreal journalist Mireille Silcoff (her 1999 book, Rave America, is credited to a pen name, Silcott) about watching bug-eyed (and on at least four kinds of drugs) as Lenny Dee, spinning behind a 25-foot chain-link fence (regularly climbed onto by frothing dancers), would finish spinning a record and then, with a flourish, shatter it against the wall.
In 1991, Dee started Industrial Strength Records specifically to push the harder-faster-louder techno sound that was beginning to be called gabber – Dutch slang for ‘friend’. The music didn’t exactly walk up and shake your hand, though. This was for banging your head, even sampling Pantera on the 1994 gabber classic “Fuckin Hostile”. (Industrial Strength Records, at 21 years old, is the longest-running New York techno labels; these days it concentrates largely on sample packs.)
Bones, on the other hand, had had enough. “I went through a lot of shit after the Storm Raves shut down,” he told Massive. “’93 was kind of a bad year for me because the drug thing got so out of control that I checked myself in. Now I’m a lot smarter because of that.”
Adam and store employee Heather Heart – who also operated the influential fanzine Under One Sky – began managing Groove Records. Later, they and Bones moved the store to Manhattan, where it was renamed Sonic Groove. Adam and Heart also began to throw their own, smaller parties under the name Mental.
“We wanted to scale the parties down because the police were starting to crack down on [large] events,” says Adam. “On Kent Avenue, people were living in abandoned warehouses, so we did a party in one of them. It was fucking incredible: 500 people, the cops didn’t show up or nothing. You could just do whatever you wanted.” Bones fondly recalls a Mental “boxcar rave – we put 80 kids in a parked train.”
Mental wasn’t the only game in town. In the wake of Storm came a deluge of party-throwers: The McMuffin Family, Infinity, Guaranteed Overdose, Uptown Underground, the Caffeine Crew. One of the biggest called itself Park Rave Maddness. Adam and Frankie frequently spun at their parties.
“They could get all these amazing spots: Madison Square Garden, Felt Forum, Randall’s Island,” says Adam. “They had the money to do it right. It was real techno. These guys would only book proper shit. The scene got better because it got [to] this professional level of working.” Circus, a Park Rave party held on June 17 headlined by Robert Hood, DJ Skull and Patrick Pulsinger, drew 10,000 people. As Pulsinger recalls, “They had to hide all the mics from Frankie Bones, who gave a speech on techno anyhow – into his headphones.”
As the scene’s movers became more entrenched, the partiers grew younger — and flaunted it, donning pacifiers and candy necklaces. Even in a druggy scene, these ‘candy ravers’, or ‘candy kids’, were notorious for their chemical intake. “Once you get to the mid- to late-90s, you started to see puddles of kids on ketamine on the floor,” says John Selway. “You’re just like, ‘What’s the point?’”
That was the mindset Chesler played to under his alias the Horrorist. “Somewhere around ’96, I started to really get an itch to return to new wave and industrial,” he says. “There are really good techno producers with a lot of skill. The only way for me to stand out was to use my own voice and tell my own story. I did my first drugs around that time, so I [wrote] stories about drugs.”
Tales such as “Mission Ecstasy” – with its unforgettably blunt tag line, “Because I like fucking drugs” – and “One Night In NYC,” about an NYU student’s trip to the Limelight to pick up a guy who “fucks her all night” in her dorm room, were unsettling. Chesler shopped them to a number of labels. “Nobody wanted them,” he says with a laugh, “so I started my own label.” He called it, hopefully, Things To Come.
But things were beginning to wind down. In 1997, Nicky Fingers – a member of DOA (Disciples Of Annihilation), one of the star acts on Industrial Strength – died of a heroin overdose, a blow to that segment of the scene. Mainstream media attention also took its toll on a defiantly underground culture.
“The spread of ecstasy in America was getting really big, even outside of the rave scene,” says Adam. “Feds really started cracking down. They were on a mission to stop these parties: ‘No more armouries for raves. You can’t have Randall Island no more.’”
The simpler, more loop-based production approach to techno that took hold around 1998 had turned the music stale. By 2000, raves were largely gone; you went dancing in clubs, and only those with cabaret licenses. A number of rave vets immersed themselves in electroclash. Selway’s label Serotonin issued the original, 1,000-copy pressing of Fischerspooner’s classic debut single “Emerge.” Later, DJ DB of NASA helped get a deal with the Ministry Of Sound label.
The once thriving business of making and playing straight up techno in New York City was gutted. “It was all happening at once,” says Adam, who was forced to close Sonic Groove in October 2004, after its profits had plummeted to one-fifth of their height. “You have 9/11, you have the advent of high-speed internet, you have Final Scratch, you have the Euro getting so much higher than the dollar, [all] within a two-year period. We used to be able to sell imports for ten dollars. Now we had to sell records for 13 dollars.”
Now, house music is techno music, and techno music now is more [like] house music. Pretty strange how all of that flipped about.
Berlin, it seemed, was where the action was, and a lot of Americans moved there – including Chesler, Selway and Adam X. In 2009, Adam released a flurry of 12-inches anonymously under the name Traversable Wormhole, tracks with the same unfettered forcefulness that once typified New York City techno.
Today, that harsh futurism has long been assimilated into the club-music landscape. In the early 90s, though, things couldn’t have been more different. New York techno evolved from house music, but as Kerri Mason recently pointed out, a DJ like Danny Tenaglia could, as late as 2000, receive “tons of flack from the ‘old-school’ house DJ community for playing current, not-necessarily-house music,” including the Berlin techno artist Maurizio.
New York techno, for a while, was truly something else. “It was the new breed,” remembers Lenny Dee. Now, he says, “House music is techno music, and techno music now is more [like] house music. Pretty strange how all of that flipped about.”
Special thanks to Abe Duque and Maria 909.
Header image © YouTube

---

Title: Video Countdown: A Journey Thru The NY Underground (Part Two)
Author: Yannick Elverfeld
Date: 2012-09-25
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2012/09/ny-techno2-video-countdown/

Video Countdown: A Journey Thru The NY Underground (Part Two)
Following our story on New York techno in the early 90s, RBMA Radio honcho, veteran DJ and club music expert Yannick Elverfeld guides us through a selection of NYC’s forgotten classics and peculiar proto-rave anthems.
This is the second installment in Yannick's two-part series. Read part one here.
Go Bitch Go! - Work This Pussy (Dancefloor Records, 1991)
This whimsical creation joins the dots between jackin’ house, vintage rave sounds and a fair hint of ballroom demeanour. JP Aviance ripped Steve Poindexter’s classic “Work That Mutha Fucker” drum pattern in its entirety, adding a grinding acid line and vocal samples from the raunchiest divas around (google Sweet Pussy Pauline, A Bitch Named Johanna). The record was quite popular at the time, yet definitely overshadowed by tracks following a similar trajectory, particularly the countless classics from Todd Terry or Masters At Work’s Kenny Dope. I will never get tired of this one.
Turntable Hype - The Mario Brothers (Go Bang! 1991)
Now, this is an 8-bit sound rave classic if ever there was one. Charley Casanova is somewhat of a NYC nightlife legend: a radio and club DJ with an array of other aliases and strong ties to the scenes in Holland and Belgium. He didn’t go down in history as a great innovator, yet the delightful Nintendo magic of “The Mario Brothers” sounded like nothing else in ’91. It was released on the Dutch Go Bang! label as the B-Side of the terrific “Set You Free” and still sounds fresh despite its silly novelty approach. Here’s some priceless early 90s footage from Casanova at Manhattan’s storied Limelight (check the hilarious interviews for Italian TV at 05:30).
Intellectual Harmonious Sanction - Drift & Dream (Easy Street, 1991)
“Huh? Did somebody say something? It is I... your house!” The most ridiculous break in techno history? The rest of the record is equally odd, with a weird acid line, a pitched up Section 25 loop and a totally useless “Planet Rock” sample all making an appearance. What sounds like it should be awful is in fact a great record, and a staple at British raves and in continental clubs at least for one summer.
33 1/3 Queen - Searchin’ (Nu Groove, 1990)
While I tried to avoid some of the obvious classics, it’s virtually impossible not to mention a few of Nu Groove’s brightest moments here, like 33 1/3 Queen’s gorgeous “Searchin’” or Bobby Konders’s “Nervous Acid.” Daryll ‘Mandrill’ Harris only put out a handful of records, but truly brought the heat with this one. “Searchin’” is basically just a rough interpretation of A Guy Called Gerald’s “Blow Your House Down," throwing in some West End disco vocals courtesy of Debbie Trusty, but still remains a timeless piece of techno-infused house music until today.
Acid Masters - Deterioration (Requestline Records, 1991)
Requestline Records was an obscure New Jersey label, releasing a string of cheap, sample-based house and Latin freestyle records. However, they also put out a fairly underrated 6-Track EP entitled Acid Masters Vol 1 by production duo Damon Wild and Ray Love. Over the years Damon specialised in 303 jams in all colours, shapes and sizes. While his Acid Masters project seemed to be a homage to the Chicago originators, his later explorations of the sound culminated in harder, monolithic acid techno like the epic “Afghan Acid,” a huge record in 1993/94, which picked up on the success of Hardfloor’s all-time classic “Acperience 1."
Jimmy Crash - Crash Course (Nu Groove, 1991)
Brooklyn’s Jimmy Crash was a pillar of the original Storm Rave crew and managed the Sonic Groove record shop during its early years, later running the Direct Drive label with Adam X. For his vigourous debut “Crash Course,” he conjured the best of all worlds, almost like a child in the rave candy store: hysterical Belgian techno choirs, bruising breakbeats on top of stuttering 4/4 kicks and a demented breakdown – a formula that worked as often as it didn’t at the time. For Nu Groove, it did work a couple of times, for instance here.
Frankie Bones - From Kings to Queens (Groove World, 1993)
Frankie Bones was a true pioneer, yet his signature sample-heavy stylings weren’t always original or musically innovative. “From Kings to Queens” was different, a rare breed of hard-hitting techno that actually had a groove. Effortlessly combining a booming kick (that almost seems out of place), a swinging acid bass line, metallic snares, Detroit-esque strings, Belgian techno roughness, tricky breaks and seductive piano sprinkles, this was clearly one of Bones’ best tunes ever. Someone play this at Berghain please!

---

Title: Less Is More: A Brief Survey of Minimalism
Author: Kiran Sande
Date: 2013-05-01
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/05/less-is-more-a-brief-survey-of-minimalism

Less Is More: A Brief Survey of Minimalism
The idea that there is virtue in stripping away, that simplicity can be beautiful, and give rise to its own special kind of complexity, is one that feels as old as the world itself – but it’s relatively new
The first half of the 20th century saw classical music back itself into a corner. In trying to break with tradition, serialist composers such as Arnold Schoenberg and Pierre Boulez pursued atonality and dissonance. Technically impressive, the resulting work was also incredibly ugly; radical, certainly, but unlistenable. The real revolution would come later, and would be a whole lot easier on the ears.
It fomented not in the conservatories of Europe but in the louche lofts and art spaces of New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, at the hands of four American composers – La Monte Young, Philip Glass, Terry Riley and Steve Reich. The minimalist impulse was American through and through: Steve Reich, rarely seen without a baseball cap atop his head, was volubly keen to find a new musical language that truthfully reflected, as he put it, “the real context of tail fins, Chuck Berry and millions of burgers sold.”
It’s hard not to see Reich and Glass’s music as a direct product of the intense bustle and verticality of Manhattan. The downtown art scene of the late ’50s and ’60s was a lively and open-minded one; as Reich once said, painters, dancers, filmmakers and writers were all “swimming in the same soup.” Minimalism was just beginning to catch on as a trend in the visual arts, with the likes of Sol Lewitt and Richard Serra gaining notoriety for their reductionist approach to painting and sculpture; change was most definitely in the air. However, no one had quite made it yet – and Serra helped out many of his friends by employing them at Low-Rate Movers, his furniture removal business. Even as their names became buzzwords about town, Reich and Glass could be found lugging pianos and cabinets up and down the steps of the city’s brownstones.
It was over on the west coast of America, however, that inspiration first struck. Terry Riley’s 1964 composition In C is often cited as the first minimalist work in music, and as a student in California, Reich was involved in its premiere. In C was a marked rejoinder to the academic complexities of Schoenberg and serialism, a sequence of simple music patterns offset in time to create a kind of undulating ambient sound. A year later, Reich unveiled his own first major work, It’s Gonna Rain, based around recordings of a sermon about the end of the world given by a black Pentecostal street preacher. Reich transferred the sermon to multiple tape loops played in and out of phase, with segments cut and rearranged. The effect was astonishing.
Even as their names became buzzwords about town, Reich and Glass could be found lugging pianos and cabinets up and down the steps of the city’s brownstones.
For Come Out (1966), Reich re-recorded a fragment of Daniel Hamm (of the falsely accused Harlem Six) speaking the words “come out to show them” on two channels, initially playing them in unison. They quickly slip out of sync; gradually the discrepancy widens and becomes a reverberation. The two voices then split into four, looped continuously, then eight, and so on, until the words are unintelligible, deconstructed into tiny rhythmic and tonal patterns. Reich was positioning music as a process with a life of its own rather than a closed book of dried ink composition; what’s more, both Come Out and It’s Gonna Rain predated the cut and paste techniques of hip hop and David Byrne and Brian Eno’s My Life In The Bush of Ghosts.
By 1967, The Velvet Underground were already prising minimalism out of the art world and into the rock ’n’ roll domain. A former member of La Monte Young’s group The Dream Syndicate, John Cale was well-versed in the power of drone and repetition. In The Velvets, Cale’s avant-garde preoccupations reacted dazzlingly with Lou Reed’s streetwise songwriting, resulting in minimalist rock masterpieces such as “I’m Waiting for the Man” and “I Heard Her Call My Name.” The Velvets influenced pretty much all important music post-1967, but it’s particularly hard to imagine the avant-rock and no wave of Rhys Chatham, Glenn Branca and Sonic Youth, not to mention the narcotic shoegaze of Spacemen 3, without them.
Hearing Reich’s Piano Phase in 1967, Philip Glass simplified his own compositional style, and set about creating works that relied upon phasing and loop patterns. In 1968, Reich wrote an essay entitled Music as a Gradual Process that neatly articulated his revolutionary ideas. In it he outlines the idea of self-determining musical process, music that “facilitates closely detailed listening.” He memorably compared listening to minimalist music to “watching the minute hand of a watch – you can perceive it moving only after you observe it for a while.” On the one hand minimalism simplified music, but on the other it enabled an appreciation of its more subtle, atomic-level complexities. As the composer John Adams remarked, Reich “didn’t reinvent the wheel so much as he showed us a new way to ride.”
By the late ’70s, minimalism was taking the world by storm. Mike Oldfield’s Reichian prog oddity Tubular Bells sold millions, and Reich’s own masterpiece, Music For 18 Musicians (1978), was a massive global success. However, it was through one Brian Eno that the principles and practices behind minimalism would properly, and most lastingly, permeate the pop mainstream. Eno and David Bowie were seen at various early minimalist concerts, and the former Roxy Music man once described a performance of Glass’s work as a “viscous bath of pure, thick energy.”
Working as producer and collaborator, Eno translated minimalist technique into widescreen pop success.
Inspired by Reich’s idea of music as system, the tape delay experiments of Riley, and the melodic sonority of Glass, Eno would create his own “ambient” music, a conceptual extension of minimalism that placed emphasis on process and the atmospheric nature of sound – “a drift away from narrative and towards landscape, from performed event to sonic space.” Working as producer and collaborator with Bowie, and later U2, Eno would translate minimalist technique into widescreen pop success.
Germany had a huge role to play in the evolution and dissemination of minimalism, with Can and especially Neu! emphasizing the cyclical groove component of rock. Cluster, Klaus Schulze and Tangerine Dream all made synthesiser-based, otherworldly sound tapestries that would variously influence ambient techno, Hollywood soundtracks and commercial rock.
Ahead of the pack, though, careering serenely down the autobahn, were Kraftwerk, whose electronic sound was at once indebted to minimalism yet completely unique. Over the course of the ’80s, American DJs and musicians such as Grandmaster Flash, Afrika Bambaata and Juan Atkins noticed how curiously funky the Düsseldorf band’s stiff riffs and rigid rhythms were, and used them as the building blocks for the earliest hip hop, electro and techno records.
While Eno knew all about Reich, Glass and Kraftwerk, you can rest assured that over in Jamaica, Lee “Scratch” Perry and King Tubby were none the wiser. That didn’t stop them from coming up with techniques of radical subtraction equally as inspired as their American and European contemporaries though. Like Eno, these visionary producers treated their mixing desks as instruments and deployed all kinds of painstaking tape-loop effects to create dub versions of vocal reggae tracks. Dub was minimalism in action: it was all about space, and the interaction of small sonic elements, with tracks reduced to their essence of drums and seismic bass, and additional sounds looped and phased and echoed around them ad infinitum.
Dub proved that the dancefloor, rather than the concert hall, was the environment where minimalism could create the most impact.
Punk in its infancy may not have been minimalist, but in the post-punk years many of those same guitar-slinging youth grasped the idea of “closely detailed listening” and minimalism proper. It’s fascinating now to consider how the rip-it-up-and-start-again philosophy ushered in by punk chimed with the minimalist strategies of the American avant-garde. Bands such as PiL, Wire, Throbbing Gristle and particularly Joy Division (aided by the cavernous, dub-savvy production of Martin Hannett), made music that was sparse and spatially aware. A few years later, taking inspiration from both Kraftwerk and post-punk essentialism, the likes of Cabaret Voltaire, The Human League and John Foxx would create their own brand of stark, minimalist electro-pop.
Dub had proved that the dancefloor, rather than the concert hall, was the environment where minimalism could create the most impact. Back in New York, the DJs Frankie Knuckles and Larry Levan were intuitively alive to the power of repetition in music, and they used tape reels and multiple copies of records to extend the hooks and rhythmic breaks of songs, inducing trance and frenzy in their rapt dancers. Producers such as Walter Gibbons and Francois K began to make club-ready extended edits of tracks that bore the unmistakable fingerprint of dub.
Arthur Russell, as au fait with the “high” minimalism of Glass and Reich as he was with disco and dub, created a series of stripped-down works, ranging from exuberant club jams such as “Go Bang” to the deeply melancholic, bare bones cello-and-voice recordings of World of Echo. Perhaps the most futuristic work of minimalism to emerge from the disco sphere, though, was Donna Summer and Giorgio Moroder’s “I Feel Love.” Presaging techno, the extended mix of this track was trance-pop minimalism writ large, a seemingly endless aural vista of ecstatic pulsation and iteration.
The rave era, and the quantum leaps forward in affordable music-making technology that came with it, would yield yet another generation of DIY minimalists. The original acid house records were stripped to the bone, and the very basis of house and techno music – repetitive bass and drums – was definitively minimalist. However, after the “second summer of love” dance music became newly preoccupied with big vocals, old-fashioned musicality and undue fuss.
It didn’t take long for some producers and listeners to revolt; doubtless partly inspired by the heightened psycho-acoustic sensitivity induced by ecstasy, there was a craving amid the underground for more stripped-down, delicate and detailed sounds. In the UK, ambient house and techno swelled up to meet this demand. The Orb’s 1990 hit “Little Fluffy Clouds” sampled Reich’s Electric Counterpoint, highlighting the consonance between the minimalism of then and the electronic head music of the present day.
Richard D. James, AKA Aphex Twin, had already shown an affinity with the phasing and pulsation of “classic” minimalism in his sensational Selected Ambient Works 85-92 album, but its 1994 sequel, Selected Ambient Works Volume II, took things to a whole new level of poise and tonal sophistication. Critics were quick to compare James to Reich and Glass, and, though he claimed he had never heard of them, by 1995 he had collaborated with Glass on “Icct Hedral” and remixed the New Yorker’s “Heroes” symphony, itself based on the album by David Bowie and Brian Eno. The lineage and legacy of minimalism was more visible than ever.
Over in Detroit, the techno producer Robert Hood was making music that was rigorously simple but not in the least bit ambient. His tough, opaquely funky “minimal techno” sound had been brewing for some time, but it was most famously showcased on the 1994 release Minimal Nation. “I was fooling around with a Juno 2 keyboard and I came across this chord sound,” Hood later explained. “Once I had that chord sound and a particular pattern I realised I didn’t need anything else. In order to maximise the feeling of the music, sometimes we have to subtract.” Not merely concerned with what worked on the dancefloor, Hood believed in minimalism as a natural response to the clutter and distraction of modern life. “Minimalism is not going to stop,” he said, “because it’s a direct reflection of the way the world is going. We’re stripping down and realising that we need to focus on what’s essential in our lives.”
As a genre, minamalism has now fallen out of fashion, but as an idea and practice it thrives.
At this time, producers such as Richie Hawtin and Daniel Bell were making comparably terse and taut tracks, but it was the Berlin-based duo of Moritz Von Oswald and Mark Ernestus, AKA Basic Channel, who took electronic minimalism that little bit deeper. Inspired by the aesthetics of Jamaican dub they created a propulsive, immersive techno sound-world unlike any that had come before. Come the noughties, in the wake of Hood and Basic Channel, not to mention Pan Sonic, Wolfgang Voigt, Jan Jelinek and Pole, “minimal” would be the catch-all term for the sound of modern house and techno, with the aptly named M-nus and Kompakt labels leading the way.
As a genre, minamalism has now fallen out of fashion, but as an idea and practice it thrives. Grime was minimalist, by default as much as by design; dubstep is minimalist, foregrounding bass and percussion in a way that would please Reich as much as it might have tickled King Tubby. Minimalism isn’t going away; in fact, it’s never been away, it’s always been there, at the heart of music – it simply took visionaries such as Riley and Reich to isolate, define and draw attention to it. Thanks to them, we all now know that music’s most enduring pleasures and mysteries occur at the micro, and not the macro, level.
A version of this article appeared in the 2010 edition of Red Bull Music Academy’s Daily Note.

---

Title: Detroit to NYC: Underground Resistance at New Music Seminar
Author: Ashley Zlatopolsky
Date: 2014-09-23
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2014/09/detroit-to-nyc-underground-resistance-at-new-music-seminar

Detroit to NYC: Underground Resistance at New Music Seminar
Imagine Jeff Mills, Terrence Parker, Mike Banks, Mike “Agent X” Clark, Bill “Billy Love” Beaver, Norm Talley, and Robert Hood all packed in a van en route to New York City’s New Music Seminar, with Banks at the wheel, preparing to unveil Underground Resistance to the general public for the very first time. Then, imagine them partying at the legendary Limelight club, and getting into it with West Coast hip hop crew Da Lench Mob at a music industry trade fair. It actually happened. From the late ’80s to the early ’90s, techno pioneers from Detroit made a yearly trip to the New Music Seminar, where they helped spread the word about the burgeoning sounds from the Motor City.
“New Music Seminar was the precursor to the Winter Music Conference,” says Mike “Agent X” Clark, a member of Underground Resistance and longtime Detroit DJ. “I originally started going in the early/mid-‘80s because I was doing a lot of DJ contests.” What Clark witnessed there was unlike anything he had ever seen before in Detroit. “I had gone to the first two or three [Seminars], and I saw cats jumping over turntables and licking the needles.” Inspired, he wanted to get a group from Detroit together to attend. He reached out to his close friend Mike Banks, who – at the time – was putting the finishing touches on a new project called Underground Resistance.
Before the late ’80s, Underground Resistance was merely an idea. Banks, who founded the Detroit collective along with Jeff Mills, got his start in a rock group dubbed Mike and the Mechanics. Things then transitioned into Members of the House, often known as just MOTH. Just like Underground Resistance, MOTH was an umbrella name under which several bands with interchanging members released music. But unlike UR, MOTH included singers who provided vocals, sometimes branching into very soulful, R&B sounds paired with house or techno. “I’m the second generation of MOTH,” says Bill Beaver, one of the group's vocalists. “We brought Motown-style gospel vocals to techno. It was a live show – we were like the Temptations of techno.”
MOTH helped shape the foundations of Underground Resistance in many ways. The sound, however, couldn’t be more different: MOTH was a carefree, party sound, Underground Resistance was harder, more militant. In the late ’80s, Banks and Mills had the concept for UR, but still hadn’t debuted it. When Clark came to Banks with the proposal to travel together to New York, he figured it would be the perfect place to do so.
“I found out about the New Music Seminar from Mike Banks,” says Beaver. “We were over there [at Banks’] cookin’ up records. It was like a baby Motown situation. One day he was like, ‘We’re going to go to New York!’ He had everyone pile into this van and we just went [with only a few weeks notice]. There were like 12-13 people in the van! I know I sat in the doorjamb all the way to New York. This wasn’t a tour van; this was a regular work van.”
Unsure of whether the first (full) group trip to the New Music Seminar occurred in 1990, 1991 or 1992, Clark believes it was right around the turn of the decade. “We [Banks and myself] posse-d a whole bunch of people: Terrence Parker, Norm Talley, Bill Beaver, Jeff Mills, Scott Weatherspoon, Raphael Merriweathers Jr. [and a few others],” he says.
Clark pauses for a moment to laugh as he remembers the drive. “We had a big huge van,” he says. “We all pitched in for gas. I think Mike [Banks] was driving. We were debating on whether we were going to take the Canadian route or the American route to get there, and right before we actually made it to Manhattan, Terrence Parker got a phone call from his wife back then. She just had their baby, so we all celebrated.”
The original New Music Seminar ran from 1980 to 1995. At its height, the NMS included early breakout performances from acts like Nirvana, My Bloody Valentine, R.E.M., Smashing Pumpkins, and Run–D.M.C. to name a few. Oasis had their debut US gig there in 1994, right before the release of Definitely Maybe. It was the spot to be discovered for emerging artists, with labels and A&R reps at every corner.
And that was exactly what everyone in attendance from Detroit needed: exposure. “The second time we went, we had an album to promote,” says Clark. “[It was Underground Resistance’s release with] Yolanda Reynolds, ‘Living for the Nite,’ which blew up [later]. That was the start of Robert Hood... we used to call him Rob Noise back then because he was a rapper. We were pushing all our [Underground Resistance] product.”
While the newfound collective was gaining some spotlight locally in Detroit, their visit to the New Music Seminar was the first time the name “Underground Resistance” reached a broader audience. According to Bill Beaver, right before leaving for one of the first seminar trips, Banks actually printed the first batch of the now iconic Underground Resistance shirts, with the black background and bold white lettering – and the whole crew sported them.
Beaver says the shirts turned heads everywhere in New York City; people were constantly asking what “Underground Resistance” was. “We had our big UR shirts on and we were like, ‘OK! We’re here!’” he recalls. “Walking around with those shirts on was huge. The thing was, we didn’t really want to talk about what [UR] was. If you knew, you knew. There was always this mystique about us. No showing faces, white labels; it really made an impact in New York.”
The West Coast hip hop group Da Lench Mob and its extended family, in particular, were curious about UR. “Ice Cube, Eazy-E, all them cats, first stepped into the scene [back then],” recalls Clark. “They were all California, Jheri-curled. We had a little booth at the seminar where we were selling all our [promotional] product. The cats came in and they were looking at it like, ‘What’s this shit right here, dawg? What’s this all about?’ You know, we had that militant thing about us in Underground Resistance. We were like the techno Public Enemy. Eazy-E and all them… I think they thought we were gonna look at them like we were scared.
“Somebody [in Da Lench Mob] said something smart to Mike Banks, and it kinda clipped him. Banks said something like, ‘You know what? This stuff is for sale, and if you don’t like it, you can put it down and keep walkin’.’ They said something about being from California and we were like, ‘We from Detroit!’ And then they were like, ‘Oh, y’all from Detroit? We heard about y’all, it’s cool.’”
Clark also remembers seeing someone from Da Lench Mob briefly getting fresh with another group later that night on a balcony – and watching it go down with three very high-profile celebrities. “It was like a five-second clash,” he recalls. “It didn’t even mean anything, but it was all over magazines. It was in a hotel, up on a balcony. They [Da Lench Mob] came from one end, and other cats came from another end, and they all ran into each other and clashed, and then they dipped. When it happened, I was talking to Barry White, Vanessa Williams, and Sinbad.”
“Back then, that seminar was the real deal,” he adds. “You had celebrities and all kinds of music – New Wave, industrial. There were other styles, but techno wasn’t happening. We were trying to push it.” Nonetheless, Clark says that he “wound up hanging out with more of the hip-hop cats than anybody else,” with Jazzy Jay, MC Hammer, and Ice-T among them.
Meanwhile, Beaver recalls meeting Kraze, Russell Simmons, Houdini, John Truelove and The Basement Boys, who had just recorded the now house music staple “Gypsy Woman (She’s Homeless)” with Crystal Waters, an emerging name at the time. Waters, who headlined a 1991 New Music Seminar party at the Palladium, was one of many artists who debuted at the seminar’s nighttime events called “New Music Nights.”
Perhaps the most memorable New Music Nights location for the Detroit gang was the Limelight, a club owned by NYC nightlife impresario Peter Gatien. “That place was too much,” says Beaver of the church-turned-nightclub palace. “The sound system was impeccable. That was the highlight of that trip.”
In the early ’90s, Jeff Mills spun as Underground Resistance at the Limelight during New Music Nights. “People had their faces painted,” recalls Norm Talley, who came along to New York to learn the process of putting out a record. “That was club culture back then… it was turning into rave culture.”
But Mills almost didn’t play. “I remember some guy was pushing Jeff Mills around,” says Beaver, “and he was like, ‘Jeff, you’re going to have to wait. This guy is a superstar DJ and he’s taking your spot.’ Jeff was supposed to spin. [Our friend] Big White was the enforcer. I remember White almost threw the guy off the balcony, so we sent him back to his room. Jeff ended up spinning – he got right back on the booths and did his thing.”
“At the end of the night, Jeff and White were offered jobs, and Jeff didn’t come home with us,” adds Clark. Thus began the start of Mills’ famous Limelight residency that pushed his career to new levels. By 1992, he was spinning New Music Seminar afterparties at Limelight, but this time, Mills was in charge.
Aside from giving Mills a DJ home in New York, the New Music Seminar events were pivotal moments for the development of Detroit house and techno: they gave Underground Resistance the chance to be heard by industry professionals from around the country, and allowed emerging DJs such as Norm Talley an opportunity to learn about the music industry and the basics of promotion. Plus, the music industry connections made throughout these trips were crucial to building Underground Resistance into a name recognized around the world. What seemed to be a Detroit techno and house field trip of sorts was actually a major stepping-stone for over a dozen DJs who are now regarded as essential names in the history of dance music.
Header image © Rob Hood and Robert O’Dell

---

Title: Young Detroit
Author: Ashley Zlatopolsky
Date: 2015-02-02
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/02/young-detroit-feature/

Young Detroit
Detroit is one of the most creative cities in the world. In this collection of profiles, Ashley Zlatopolsky highlights just a few of the Motor City’s most interesting producers and – in the process – tells a story about the city itself.
Lauren Vellucci, 20, picks at a plate of French fries inside Honest John’s, a small dive bar and restaurant at the edge of what used to be known as Cass Corridor. “Growing up, I was scared of Detroit,” she says. “All of these older grownups would talk about how bad it was. They’d tell me, ‘Never go to Detroit unless you have to.’”
Cass Corridor was recently rebranded as Midtown, a hipper, more urban and lively neighborhood at the center of Detroit’s cultural resurgence. It was an area once littered with broken needles, where prostitutes roamed the streets late at night. Back then, the Detroit Free Press often referred to it as the “Notorious Cass Corridor.” Today, a new restaurant seems to open almost monthly and dozens of young people ride their bikes down Midtown’s streets. USA Today even named Midtown one of the “10 Up-and-Coming Neighborhoods” in the country. “I think seeing creatively what Detroit offers really changed my demeanor [about the city],” says Vellucci, who lives close to Midtown. “After moving to Detroit, I’m definitely still aware and cautious, but I’m no longer frightened of the city I now live in.”
One of the latest Midtown developments hits home for the minimal and techno DJ: the opening of an electronic music club in the space that houses the Magic Stick, a popular live music venue on Woodward. It’s a breath of fresh air for Detroit club culture, considering the number of clubs that have shut down over last five years, including Vain and 10 Critics. Only a handful of clubs remain in the city – like TV Lounge, where Vellucci is the youngest resident DJ. “I could go to school or do so many other things, but I can always find my spot at TV Lounge,” she says. “People really look out for you there. If you’re falling over, Big Wayne [the security guard] is going to come pick you up and set you down on the couch and give you a soda.”
She says finding her “techno family” at TV Lounge was the best feeling in the world. “You can go there and be like, ‘I’m going to have a great time no matter what because all the people around me love me.’ It’s the coolest fucking thing because for the longest time, I had such a hard time breaking out of my shell and accepting the person I really am.”
If I didn’t buy records, I don’t know where I would be in life or musically.
Like many others before her, Vellucci discovered a sense of belonging within Detroit’s electronic music community, one that is extraordinarily tight-knit yet still accepting of new talent, new ideas and new people. “It’s honoring to be a young DJ [in Detroit] and get as much respect as I do,” she says with a smile. “I get a lot of respect for playing vinyl because a lot of these older DJs started off playing records. It’s cool to still be supporting the roots that once blossomed the tree.”
The respect didn’t come as easily in the world of BMX riding, another passion in Vellucci’s life. “I would always get hassled for being a girl and wanting to keep up with all the dudes and shred,” Vellucci remembers. “I mean, I would wake up every day and ride until the sun came down. I got no respect really, just teased, put down, or even worse, people would say, ‘Hey, you’re pretty good for a girl!’”
The negativity taught her to become confident, which in turn changed her attitude towards playing music. “It’s a very male-dominated industry,” she admits. Nonetheless, Vellucci’s first time encountering techno was at a house party she attended in high school, where Punisher (Michelle Herrmann) was spinning. “She threw down a relentless all-vinyl set,” remembers Vellucci. “I was hooked after I witnessed this weird techno shit going down.”
Vellucci began buying vinyl shortly after. Nowadays, she even works part-time at Detroit Threads, the city’s go-to record store for electronic music. “I have my little schedule: I get my pizza across the street at Jet’s, smoke my cigarette, then I go into work and go through records,” she says of the shop.
Detroit Threads’ owner Mikel Smith is a familiar face to the Detroit electronic music community and beyond. A former raver with endless stories about the ’80s and ’90s, his warm smile and trademark mustache greets customers at the homely record shop, which is just a short walk from the famed Motor Lounge, now a deserted, shacked up memory at the corner of Caniff and Klinger. “A lot of people come into the shop: foreigners, artists, DJs who were maybe booked the night before,” Vellucci says. “DJ Three came in after playing TV Lounge. It was cool, because it wasn’t a party atmosphere and I could just talk to him as a person.”
Vellucci works there not because she needs money, but because she likes to give back. “If I didn’t buy records, I don’t know where I would be in life or musically,” she says. “Record stores preserve all these amazing records for people. I buy records for three simple reasons: support, knowledge, and for the love of them.”
When it comes to her own sound, Vellucci’s style is very rhythmic with a 4/4 beat and heavy on percussion. One can expect to hear lots of mechanical noises, crashing highs, and obscure clicks and beeps, paired with lengthy basslines and peculiar vocals. She self-describes her music as “eerie and kind of scary, like walking through a dark forest or swamp.” While typically known for minimal and techno sets, she sometimes ventures into industrial. “A lot of DJs like to find the hottest shit or the newest shit, but I’m trying to find the shit people don’t know, the shit they’ve never heard,” she says. “Some weird stuff that’ll make them say, ‘What the fuck is this?’ I want to blow their mind with it.”
26-year-old Gabi Schwarz works as a social worker by day. “I think Detroit is more art and entertainment focused because we put up with so much shit,” she says, drawing on her experience at work, “and because of that, we just want to have fun at the end of the day.”
Living in Southwest Detroit, Schwarz senses a buzz in the air every time Detroit is poised to undergo a positive change. There have been extraordinary amounts lately, particularly in her neighborhood. “It’s kind of amazing how excited people get for a business to start in Detroit,” she muses. “I feel like everybody around the globe roots for Detroit. I think a lot of places look at us as this struggling, dying city, and that if you come from Detroit, you’re a total hardass.”
Detroit is such a small scene and because of that, everyone is like family.
The startups now bringing business to the city are finding homes in buildings that stood empty for years, sometimes even decades. Previously abandoned skyscrapers and historic structures are being restored into hotels, apartments, and retail centers, keeping the original art deco and post-modern architecture – often recognized as some of the finest in the country – intact. The David Whitney Building, a downtown Detroit staple that stood empty since 1999, recently reopened its doors, completely restored.
Detroit’s electronic music community is no stranger to the city’s redevelopment. Aside from the aforementioned club opening in the Magic Stick, Tresor’s Dimitri Hegemann has his eyes on the abandoned Fisher Body Plant 21, which sits decaying at the edge of I-94 and I-75. He hopes to restore it, turning it into a cultural mecca complete with a techno club. Whether or not such a club could draw enough people to sustain it, however, is an open question.
Detroit’s electronic music community is actually pretty small in terms of numbers, just like the city itself. (Boston, San Francisco and the borough of Manhattan could fit within Detroit’s city limits, but the population remains under one million.) That’s what makes it special for many people, though. “Detroit is such a small scene and because of that, everyone is like family,” says Schwarz, who DJs by night. “If you lose your headphones, someone’s going to be like, ‘Those are Lauren Vellucci’s headphones.’ You’ll get them back... All we really have is TV Lounge [and a few other spots]. You see the same people every weekend and know who everybody is and they’re all your friends. What greater feeling is there than going out on a Friday night and seeing 70 friends?”
Growing up in the small city of New Baltimore (northeast of Detroit), Schwarz feels lucky to have such a community to surround herself with. “I had friends growing up who were into spinning records – hip hop – and then they started spinning Detroit techno,” she remembers. “I used to think, ‘What’s this weird music?’ because they weren’t doing it very well. It wasn’t until I went to Taste Fest where I saw Heartthrob play that I was like, ‘OK. I get it. I understand this sound now.’”
Schwarz began spinning by her 17th birthday. Now 26, her resume includes signing with Modified Artists and playing Movement Electronic Music Festival. She’s also a Paxahau resident. But as a young female DJ, Schwarz still struggles with perceptions. “I remember one time at Grasshopper Underground, a guy came up to me when I was playing a tag set with three other guys,” she recalls, basking under the blue light of a flickering neon sign. “I was hanging to the side of the booth waiting for my turn to play records and this guy was like, ‘Shouldn’t you be out there?’ and pointed to the dance floor. I was like, ‘What do you mean?’ and he was like, ‘Shouldn’t you be dancing instead of trying to get with this DJ?’ I go, ‘Watch this.’ I grabbed the headphones and slayed my first mix. His jaw dropped.”
It’s uncomfortable for her to discuss gender issues, but Schwarz feels it’s important to address them rather than pretend they don’t exist. “It is hard to be a female DJ in Detroit because I don’t have many female DJs older than me that I’m around,” she admits. “I’ve learned everything that I know from guys, and with that comes a certain degree of having to respect yourself and what you are doing.”
Schwarz is an extremely spiritual person. She strongly believes in her own energy and the energy of those around her. A homemade wire-wrapped crystal pendant hangs around her neck, reflecting off the table. It’s a selenite, and its purpose is to repel negative frequencies and connect her with spirit guides. “I’ve been told by a few spiritual people that my superpower is to move frequencies,” she says. “I can do it in my day job and I can do it in music. Through music, I’m able to manipulate sound waves, which are frequencies, which affect people and the way they feel. They relate directly to our emotional body, which is a layer of energy directly around our physical body.”
In her eyes, music is a direct connection to the inhibitions. “A lot of times when I’m playing a show, you can hear what I feel,” says Schwarz, noting how her sets are similar to hypnotherapy. “I’m very susceptible to energy around me. It translates into DJing because I’m able to walk into a room and feel what everybody is feeling and put that feeling back on the dance floor.”
Schwarz’s current state of energy influences her music selection, which tends to gravitate toward minimal and tech house with deep overlays and mystical vibes. But she believes it sometimes results in many different Gabis, all with different sounds. “Depending on how I feel, I can be hard techno Gabi or I can be deep house Gabi or I can be house Gabi,” she says. “I always ask myself, ‘What do I want to bring to this party?’ That way, I am able to raise vibrations of people who come together for one common purpose: to have a good time.”
Duncan MacLachlan and Konstantin Papatheodoropoulos step over broken slabs of concrete embedded within the snowy remains of Eastown Theatre, one of Detroit’s most iconic music venues. The Who, Fleetwood Mac, and Cream graced its stage in the ’70s, and it later became a home for raves in the mid-to-late ’90s. “I’m trying to imagine what this place looked like when people were actually going here,” says 25-year-old MacLachlan, eyeing the largest pile of debris in the center of the ruin on Harper Avenue. It contains the theater’s legendary dome ceiling, which caved in over the summer. Behind the debris, whispers of fabric dance above the stage in the cold winter wind, the only remnants of curtains whose colors have been lost to time and elements. “I want to know what it sounded like, what it was like to be here and experience all its glory,” adds 29-year-old Papatheodoropoulos. “I look around and it still is beautiful.”
Visiting Eastown Theatre leaves Papatheodoropoulos in a state of awe and nostalgia. “This is what I thought every city looked like before I had a chance to leave Detroit,” he says. “When I used to come to Detroit with my parents in the early ’90s, you just came and left. There wasn’t much hanging out. You still knew of and saw these really epic places where really amazing things happened, but they got left to fall apart, like the whole city itself. It’s forgotten beauty, really.”
As soon as I started dancing, everything made sense. It clicked.
MacLachlan glances at the twisted metal hanging from what remains of the balcony, which is also on the verge of collapsing. “This is what home has always kind of looked like,” he says. When rave culture exploded in the ’90s, underground parties found homes in places like the Eastown Theatre, breathing life back into abandoned, dusty buildings with hard techno beats, strobe lights and hundreds (sometimes thousands) of people dancing through the sunrise. With over one-third of Detroit’s properties abandoned, the city became a concrete playground for the electronic music community. “When I first started going to parties in the late ’90s to early ’00s, I’d go to raves in places that had holes in the floor,” Papatheodoropoulos remembers. “If you had to go to the bathroom, you had to walk across a plank two stories up. It was scary, but it was fun. Going out in Detroit was so much different than going out anywhere else because of the sense of danger.”
Papatheodoropoulos was afraid to dance at his first rave at the age of 13, even though he started DJing at the age of nine with one turntable and a Gemini mixer with two channels. “I sat in the corner scared because I was a young kid. I didn’t know what was going on... it was intimidating. But as soon as I started dancing, everything made sense. It clicked.” He got a second turntable shortly after.
Growing up homeschooled in a house that did not allow television, MacLachlan was introduced to dance music through Detroit radio. “I got my first radio when I was 12 and that was the first time I had ever heard ghettotech,” he says. “They’d play ghettotech mixes at 11 o’clock at night. I’d fall asleep listening to them.” In the same way that older Detroit DJs were influenced by radio personalities like Electrifying Mojo, Jeff “The Wizard” Mills, and Duane “In the Mix” Bradley, those included in this feature found inspiration through the airwaves. In the early ’00s, underground dance music was still a mainstay on Detroit radio. “I would stay up really late listening to Derek Plaslaiko’s sets broadcast from one of his residencies,” Papatheodoropoulos recalls.
Duncan and Konstantin are part of the How To Kill collective, a crew shaped by the sound of Detroit, one that branches out beyond dance music and is informed by its roots in soul, jazz, and automobiles. “The sound of Detroit is based out of the automotive industry,” Papatheodoropoulos explains. “It’s the sounds of technology, and technology is what really drove the sound of electronica from the beginning. It’s futurism.” MacLachlan notes dance music wouldn’t exist without Motown (“Reflections” by Diana Ross & The Supremes was actually one of the first hit singles to use a Moog synthesizer). “You have to go all the way back to Motown because that’s what influenced all of it,” he says.
Similar to Motown, How To Kill feels like a family. The collective self-releases their albums, with three compilations under their belt and a fourth on the way. Papatheodoropoulos, who goes under the moniker “The Friend,” says a big reason How To Kill started was simply because they wanted to keep the Detroit attitude of pressing records alive. “Back in the day, people would press other people’s music,” he describes. “It was a punk mentality, but with electronica.”
MacLachlan, who DJs under “Shady P,” says Papatheodoropoulos, Joel Dunn, and Bobby Casalou created the concept of the music behind How To Kill. “We all kind of came together with the idea of ‘Hey, this is really good music and we should do something with it,’” he explains. “We weren’t expecting to be successful or as successful as we are. We just wanted people to hear it because it’s different.”
Aran Daniels and Mike Petrack soon came into the picture (along with guest appearances by artists such as Broodlings, Matt Abbott, and Stefan Ringer on certain records), rounding out How To Kill into the collective it is today. The group recently scored a Thursday night residency at TV Lounge for TV Dinners, plus a Chicago booking at Smart Bar. Papatheodoropoulos also joined Air London’s roster of artists under his The Friend guise, whose sound he describes as “a venture into a factory in the dead of night where a single strobe light pops off every minute.” MacLachlan describes his music in similarly evocative terms: “It’s like driving your dream car to Detroit with a broken muffler and low oil.”
For both MacLachlan and Papatheodoropoulos, being an artist is first and foremost a learning experience. “It’s not about the music you make in terms of being a DJ,” Papatheodoropoulos notes, pausing for a moment to smile. “It’s about having an opportunity to play records consecutively, over and over again until you know everything about them.”
The above four artists are, of course, just a few of the young musicians shaping the city’s vast musical landscape. Duncan MacLachlan’s brother Malcolm runs Sly Fox Records, one of several record labels that has recently emerged from Detroit alongside Kyle Hall’s Wild Oats, which includes MGUN’s experimental and ambient excursions and house producer Jay Daniel, who first released through Theo Parrish’s Sound Signature. Taylor Hawkins is another leading young producer, who sometimes releases under the name Community Corporation. (He played one of the very last sets during 1217 Griswold’s final party.) Then there’s Ross Regs and Doug English, who continue to drop hot G-house mixes. In short, things are exciting in the city right now – and as varied as ever, with all of the styles somehow meshing together into one all-encompassing umbrella: the sound of Detroit.
All photos: Joe Gall
Header image © Joe Gall

---

Title: An Introduction to E.A.T. - Engineers, the Avant-Garde and a Tennis Court
Author: Sophie Weiner
Date: 2016-05-31
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/05/e-a-t-experiments-in-art-technology/

An Introduction to E.A.T. - Engineers, the Avant-Garde and a Tennis Court
Sophie Weiner introduces the pioneering organization and the subject of our new documentary
On March 18th, 1960, a sculpture on the roof of New York’s Museum of Modern Art began to destroy itself. Engines attached to old baby carriages sent them careening through the space, mechanical arms banged out a dissonant tune on a piano and a paintbrush colored an unfurling paper that just as quickly caught on fire. The piece, titled Homage to New York and built by the French sculptor Jean Tinguely alongside engineer Billy Klüver, was created in order to self-destruct. The performance was the beginning of a series of collaborations that would bring together the worlds of art and technology in ways that were unimaginable in mid-century America.
Klüver, originally from Sweden, was a technician at Bell Laboratories, whose innovations in the ’60s and ’70s paved the way for the digital age. An egalitarian and experimental ethos allowed Bell Labs to foster an incredible wellspring of creativity in these decades. The title of every Bell Labs engineer was “Member of Technical Staff,” whether they were the lowest entry-level hire or one of the company’s presidents. Experimentation without a specific end goal was embraced – as long as their engineers were working on something interesting, Bell Labs didn’t worry about their work immediately translating into something that could be sold. The strategy paid off: In these years Bell Labs launched the first telecommunications satellites, invented the omnipresent C programming language and, most importantly, designed the transistor, the technology that allowed computers to shrink from the size of buildings to something that can fit in your palm.
Yet Klüver believed that even the uniquely innovative environment of Bell Labs could be improved by outsiders. He began to hang around the avant-garde artistic circles flourishing in Downtown Manhattan. At this time, a deep divide existed between the worlds of art and technology. Artists saw engineering as the realm of war machines and algorithms that would negate the individual, creating mass conformity. Meanwhile, Bell Labs engineers were largely unaware of the revolutionary art happening just a few miles away in Manhattan. As Klüver got to know more artists, he realized there could be a mutually beneficial relationship between the two groups, aiding artists with their work while expanding the minds of engineers.
The era was as exciting for art in New York City as it was for technology. Pop artists like Andy Warhol, Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg were reshaping what could be understood as a work of art. At the Judson Memorial Church in Greenwich Village, choreographers like Merce Cunningham and Yvonne Rainer were reinventing dance as a medium that incorporated everyday movements alongside virtuosic talent. And in the world of music, composers like John Cage were exploding the rules of sound.
Klüver was interested in working with some of these pioneering artists. His friend, Pontus Hulten, was a curator at the Museum of Modern Art, and it was Hulten who connected Klüver to the sculptor Tinguely, kickstarting their collaboration. During this time, Klüver also worked with Rauschenberg on a mechanical sculpture entitled Oracle, with Johns on Field Painting (involving the first battery-powered neon letter) and with Warhol on the famous Silver Clouds, floating rectangular balloons made from the Mylar-like material used by Bell Laboratories for their early satellites.
In 1966, Klüver, along with Rauschenberg, began to put together an ambitious exhibition of projects that paired engineers with artists for the Stockholm Festival of Art and Technology. After the collaboration with the festival fell through, the group decided to pursue the idea in New York City instead. They chose the 69th Regiment Armory, a massive indoor space that was famously used for the 1913 Armory show that helped introduce America to modern art.
An art project of mass proportions began to take shape. It would become 9 Evenings: Theater and Engineering, a collaboration between artists like Cage, Rauschenberg, Rainer, David Tudor and others with 30 engineers from Bell Labs. The group prepared frantically, transforming the Armory into an arts space that could hold an audience of thousands. In the weeks leading up to the event, the engineers built a revolutionary system called TEEM, a central computer that could control each performance’s cues, turning on and off lights, moving set pieces and switching on and off cameras and microphones.
9 Evenings used novel technology like wireless microphones and fiber optic cables to enhance the artists’ work. Rauschenberg’s piece Open Score had him playing tennis with rackets wired to make a loud booming sound and to turn off a light in the space each time he hit a ball. After the tennis match darkened the entire space, Rauschenberg flooded it with infrared light and shuttled hundreds of people from a subway train through the space. They could only be seen on the infrared-sensitive cameras whose images were projected above. It was the first time infrared light was used for an art piece in the United States – at the time, it was classified technology for military use only, so Rauschenberg had to buy the equipment from Japan.
Cage’s Variations VII used a huge array of auditory inputs, including ten phone lines connected to places like a local restaurant and the Bronx Zoo Aviary, along with the sounds of dozens of radio and TV stations, two Geiger counters and six contact mics attached to devices like toasters and blenders within the space. Cage switched between these feeds, combining and mixing them live. The artist Robert Whitman drove seven cars holding projectors into the Armory, some showing scenes of dancers being filmed live elsewhere in the space. The work was radical at the time, but it foretold a future where seeing a live event from a variety of perspectives at once is commonplace.
The time crunch leading up to the event meant that much went wrong during the nine nights of shows. Even when the technology did work, audiences didn’t know what they were seeing, and many walked out in disgust. But the group who had participated felt that the event demonstrated the value of bringing together engineering and art. The engineers were inspired to create new technology, and the artists ideas were pushed in new directions by the engineers’ interpretations. The event pushed Klüver to found an organization, Experiments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.), which would connect artists to engineers, providing a space where technology and creativity could meet.
In 1968, Klüver took an offer from his curator friend Hulten as a chance to lure more engineers into the fold. The Museum of Modern Art was putting on a show, The Machine Seen at the End of the Mechanical Age, and Hulten wanted Klüver to help find contemporary artists who used technology in their works. E.A.T announced a competition for collaborations between artists and engineers to land a spot in the show, where the engineer would be named as the winner instead of the artist. They received over 150 submissions, nine of which – including the early ASCII-style work Computer Nude by Kenneth Knowlton – made it into the show. But E.A.T. were so impressed by the submissions that they decided to exhibit all of them. These were shown at Some More Beginnings, a show at the Brooklyn Museum in late 1968, including a laser installation by Bob Whitman and an interactive sculpture by Jean Dupuy using amplified heartbeats.
By 1968, there were over 4,000 members of E.A.T. and multiple spin-off groups in cities around the country. The organization devised a basic analog computer to connect artists and engineers, using index cards with holes that delineated their interests and skills. Through the next several years, it’s impossible to know how many works were born from these connections. But in 1970, the group created their most ambitious project since 9 Evenings when they began work on the Pepsi Pavilion for the 1970 World’s Fair in Osaka, Japan.
Rauschenberg persuaded Pepsi’s marketing team to fund the building of a futuristic structure for performances and spectacles at the fair. The initial outlay was some $500,000, although the end result would cost much more. E.A.T. was provided with an already-constructed building to work with: a geodesic white dome that they hated, calling it a “buckled Fuller.” Their displeasure with the structure inspired one of the Pavilion’s most memorable characteristics: the dense fog, created by the artist Fujiko Nakaya, that obscured it from view.
Inside the dome, the engineers worked to figure out how to create a spherical mirror by inflating the same Mylar used for Silver Clouds, allowing visitors to see a holographic, upside-down representation of themselves when they looked up. The artist Robert Breer built “floats,” white domed fiberglass sculptures that moved slowly outside the pavilion’s entrance. E.A.T. planned a series of performances to occur within the space, but a little more than a month after its opening, Pepsi assumed control over the pavilion. E.A.T.’s experimental definition of entertainment and their continued overspending was too much for the corporation, and Pepsi soon replaced the performance art with concerts by accessible pop groups.
Around the same time as their difficult Pepsi Pavilion experience, E.A.T. was inspired to move their work outside the art world. Projects Outside Art reflected E.A.T.’s idealistic vision of the artist as a partner in social projects. Launched with a poster in December 1969, the project called for submissions of “realizable projects in the environment.” By June 1970, the group had received about 115 submissions, many of which were from architects and focused on sustainability and pollution. One project that was accepted was City Agriculture, a hydroponic roof garden to be built at E.A.T.’s headquarters on East 68th Street.
The final, and most interesting project undertaken in Projects Outside Art was known as Children and Communication. Two sites in Manhattan were connected via live video, fax machines and computer terminals at which children could type each other messages. What emerged was a kind of proto-internet given over to play and experimentation.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the result of the experiment was that the children used their newfound interconnectivity to send insulting language and even threats of violence to each other. It was a subtle warning of the power of new communications technology to both expand and endanger the lives of its users.
E.A.T. worked on projects throughout the 1970s, but towards the end of the decade the organization began to dissolve. E.A.T. was not designed to last. Rather, Klüver said, “If E.A.T. [is] successful, it [will] automatically disappear, because if everybody understands the idea of artists and engineers working together there is no reason for E.A.T. to exist.”
By that metric, the organization was a fantastic success. It’s difficult to enter a museum today without encountering multiple pieces made in collaboration with engineers or programmers, and interactivity, which was a cornerstone of many E.A.T. projects, is commonplace in artworks today. E.A.T. succeeded in closing a divide that was holding both artists and engineers back from reaching the full potential of their mediums, created a future where technology and art, in tandem, can help to build a better society.
