Red Bull Music Academy — Electronic Music (General)

Source: Red Bull Music Academy Daily (daily.redbullmusicacademy.com)
Citation Tier: 2 (established music publication)
Articles: 7

---

Title: Synth-Aesthesia: Caught By The Fuzz (Pedal)
Author: Jan Niklas Jansen
Date: 2012-09-17
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2012/09/synth-aesthesia-fuzz/

Synth-Aesthesia: Caught By The Fuzz (Pedal)
Arguably, the history of fuzz boxes starts in 1962, with a broken recording console in Nashville, Tennessee. Marty Robbins was recording what would become his hit song “Don’t Worry” and the channel for the bass guitar malfunctioned, resulting in a buzzing, distorted sound. Thus began the fuzz family tree.
Not that this kind of sound was new – people had been bending sounds in all kinds of ways before, from overdriving the input stage of valve amplifiers to slashing speaker cones with pens and razor blades. But unlike any of these methods, the sound of “Don’t Worry” could be reproduced with a couple of germanium transistors and the most basic circuitry fitting into a small metal enclosure. The first commercially available fuzz box was the Gibson FZ-1, over 5000 of which shipped to dealers in 1962.
This basic circuit soon found its way into the hands of electronic engineers around the world, resulting in countless variations coming up as early as 1965. Discussions of which circuit is the superior one go on to this day. Astonishing, given the small number of variables, and the fact that we’re talking about a unit which is a rather blunt tool – bludgeoning the sine wave output of an instrument into a square wave, and usually increasing the volume along the way. But don’t let rationality get in the way. There is a sonic universe of everything from violin-like singing sustain to utterly distorted chaos to explore, plus a world of invention that continues to attract a colourful bunch of sonic pioneers.
Tycobrahe Octavia
The Tycobrahe Octavia was an early example of an ‘octave-up’ fuzz unit, meaning that it takes the frequency of the input signal and doubles it. This works really well when given a clean sine wave. Anything beyond that, and especially any complex combination of notes, results in often unpredictable effects. It’s said Jimi Hendrix had his original octave-up pedal repaired in California, where Tycobrahe were building mixing desks at the time, and that they stole the circuit layout on that occasion. It’s also been said that Jimi’s pedal ran on higher voltage, sounded a lot sweeter overall and probably had its own kind of voodoo. Yet try and find an original Tycobrahe Octavia (good luck on that) or a modern day clone (Chicago Iron builds brilliant ones), and you will find the sound that defined much of early American garage rock, as well as just about any Morricone Western soundtrack worth its money.
Roland AF 100 Bee Baa Fuzz
In April 1972, Ikutaro Kakehashi founded the Roland Corporation in a rented shed, with funds of $100,000 and seven employees taken along from his previous endeavour, Ace Electronic. The first Roland product was the TR77 rhythm box, but the same year also saw the first Roland effects units, including the AF100 Bee Baa Fuzz. In the history of Roland, it might not be much more than a footnote, but it is an interesting beast nonetheless. Nowhere near as confusing as fellow Japanese multi-effects units (most notably by Shin-ei who released a combined fuzz and wah pedal that also included a siren), the Bee Baa combined two different fuzz tones and a treble boost, all foot switchable. All controls are at the back, so that settings are safe when hitting the switches. The fuzz variations sound brilliant, ranging from discordant walls of sound to wiry Spaghetti Western sonics, while the treble boost is one of the most colourful boost circuits around. Roland would go on to find great success with effects sold under the Boss brand name, but the AF-100 never really took off – which might be due to the fact that for all the great sound packed into the box, Roland failed to include any visual indicators for what sound is currently selected, and what might happen when you hit one of the switches.
Electro Harmonix Big Muff π
Without doubt, Mike Matthews is the biggest legend in the effects business. Part hippie, part NYC hustler, part electronics wizard, he has shaped both the sound and the business of effects for more than four decades. And the Big Muff fuzz is the pedal the whole Electro Harmonix empire is built upon. Before it, production fuzzes tended to be based on germanium transistors, which are rather musical but also temperamental and prone to changing characteristics in varying temperatures and humidity. The basic design for the Big Muff came from Bell Labs inventor Robert Myer, but from there on the pedal is all Matthews. He’s the one who tuned the frequency response to achieve violin-like sustain and tone, and who came up with the marketing hype. And it was Matthews who used it to start a long-standing and widespread tradition of dubiously named effects boxes.
It is impractical bordering on unusable – and quite brilliant if that’s what you’re looking for.
Over the years, the Big Muff π has gone through lots of variations – a personal favourite is the Green Russian. By the mid-80s, Electro Harmonix had gone bankrupt twice and Matthews turned to the USSR to get back onto his feet. He correctly predicted the crumbling military industrial complex to be a gold mine for vacuum tubes, integrated circuits and cheap labour. One result of these new developments was the Green Russian Big Muff, another great inefficient fuzz box design. The huge metal casing is built like a tank, serving as a nice counterpoint to all other elements being prone to falling apart in the slightest breeze. It sounds wonderful though, with a frequency response that makes it more suitable for bass and synths than most fuzzes that came before it. And coming at a time when bland rack units still ruled most music stores, it hit the shelves as a true revelation: it looked great, was affordable and sounded louder than everything else.
Zvex Fuzz Factory
Not long after the Russian Muffs, Zachary Vex out of Minnesota presented the Fuzz Factory. Originally only available in hand-painted enclosures, and featuring a circuit that bent the original fuzz designs of the 60s beyond recognition, this one marks the beginning of a new generation of effects and effects builders. And again, it was a simple idea that made all the difference. Most fuzz effects rely on very few components; these take careful tuning to provide reliable results and prevent the sound from turning into pure sonic anarchy. What Zvex did was leave it up to the user to control the variables of transistor bias and supply voltage through knobs on the outside. From then on, all the sounds usually avoided through good engineering became available: stuttering gated sounds, feedback that can be pitch controlled through input volume, uncontrollable squeals – it’s all in there. Zachary Vex’s own truthful description of the controls is, “Although the five knobs are named for the parameters over which they seem to have the most control, please don't hold me to it.” He goes on to advise people to write down the settings for any good sounds they achieve – yet half the fun is that whenever you are stuck with an instrument (or even a mix), you can rely on the Fuzz Factory to suggest sounds that no run of rational thoughts would lead to.
Death By Audio Soundwave Breakdown
The Fuzz Factory had a huge and lasting impact on the DIY scene. Not only did it offer sounds previously unheard of, the handpainted enclosure proudly displayed its own roots in DIY manufacturing – and the price tag was high enough to make home tinkering a tempting thought, especially since the circuitboard only holds 13 components. And while many builders hit eBay with their clones of the unit, there were enough who took this as a starting point for ever wilder ideas. Brooklyn’s Death By Audio (now also a performance space, studio and the home of A Place To Bury Strangers) started out as one such venture – and their current lineup makes the Fuzz Factory sound feeble in comparison. Their Soundwave Breakdown does exactly as it says on the tin, allowing all kinds of wave shapes to be forced upon the input signals. It also does way with the volume control, which is somewhat like building a hotrod without brakes.
Mid-Fi Electronics Random Number Generator
Another great one is the Random Number Generator by Mid-Fi Electronics: Technically, it is a fuzz pedal that stacks several fuzz circuits and allows the sound to tumble into octaves up and down, depending somewhat on input volume. It is impractical bordering on unusable – and quite brilliant if that’s what you’re looking for.
4MS Noise Swash
This one sits on the shaky borderline between highly evolved fuzz pedal and primitive synthesizer. Even without anything plugged into the input, it will generate notes that can be changed, if not controlled, through the knobs. It’s notable because it builds several walls of sounds at once (and will anger most any front-of-house engineer, or break your amplifier), but also because 4MS as a company have been at the forefront of several DIY developments for years. Early on, they built the noisiest noise pedals of them all. They included synth-like devices from the start. They’ve offered DIY kits from the get-go. And they were amongst the first to branch out into the world of Eurorack synthesizer systems, where many pedal builders now offer effects and signal generators. This has proven to be an environment where the freewheeling spirit of early synth inventors lives on, filtered through years of circuit-bending tradition and fuzz box soldering.
Metasonix Butt Probe
This is not to say 4MS were the first or the greatest at what they do – and this is not a competition. Though, if it was, all kinds of awards would need to go to Metasonix. Based on vacuum tubes, their designs take everything to unknown extremes. Their fuzz box was called the Butt Probe (with controls including ‘Fist’ and ‘Ream’), with the expressed purpose of screwing any signal fed into its input. It is currently out of production, but it’s said that the current multi-effect KV-100 Assblaster will take up a similar purpose. It is one of the most amusing, most expensive and most surreal ways of making any instrument sound like, well, ass. As such, it might well be the ultimate fuzz-like effect out there. It’s also probably, after all these years, one piece of gear that will still get you kicked out of any Nashville recording sessions.
Jan Niklas Jansen is an editor at RBMA Radio. In his free time he plays guitar with Locas In Love and co-runs Bear Cave studio in Cologne, Germany.

---

Title: RBMA x Amsterdam Dance Event 2012
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2012-10-11
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2012/10/rbma-x-amsterdam-dance-event

RBMA x Amsterdam Dance Event 2012
With great pride we present the latest issue of EIGHT magazine, hosted by the Red Bull Studio Amsterdam. Eight artists were invited to bring a musician or producer along to the studio to work in unison: creating art and music at the same time, inspired by one and another. All works will be exhibited at the ADE Festival Lounge at Stanislavski, and you can pick up your free copy there.
Thursday 18/10 - Legowelt
Friday 19/10 - Clone x Rush Hour feat. Serge & Antal
Saturday 20/10 - Gerd & Dexter
To attend a session, send an e-mail with the session date and name in the subject to leon@redbullstudio.nl
We kick things off right on the first night at ADE: Red Bull Music Academy teams up with Cologne’s Kompakt label, bringing Academy lecturer Michael Mayer, brazilian techno leader Gui Boratto, Nice’s Jennifer Cardini and local hero Jorn Liefdeshuis, plus a live performance by Cologne’s Kölsch to Melkweg. You can buy tickets for the event here, and for anyone who can’t make it in person, RBMA Radio will be recording the party highlights.
Amsterdam’s forward-thinking audiovisual night Green Room presents a special night at Studio/K, featuring artists from some of the key underground electronic music labels of the moment. With Lazer Sword’s Lando Kal (Hot Flush), 2013 Academy pick Sinjin Hawke (Pelican Fly), Redinho (Numbers) and Helix (Night Slugs) DJing alongside Kidnap Kid, Presk and many more. Tying things together will be the Green Room’s core team of audiovisual residents: Inuk, Lantei, Kristof & Cursed P, newly added Omega Redd and VJs Aintsane, Lideborg and De Lange Man. One not to miss.
The timetable is available here.
Three labels. One night. Trouw nightclub has set up a special night featuring some of Europe’s most upfront underground electronic music labels. Clone, Delsin and Rush Hour will send their most eminent representatives. Den Haag’s Detroit-influenced weirdo (and Academy lecturer, pictured at top) Legowelt pairs up with San Fransisco’s Xosar and A Made Up Sound aka Tectonic’s 2562, Rotterdam’s Gerd, Delsin’s Delta Funktionen and Rush Hour mates Aroy Dee, Awanto 3 and San Proper complete the night.
The final ADE 2012 night for Club Up is a special one. Audio Culture started their record label in July 2011 and has been making waves since then. For ADE 2012, they put together a very impressive label showcase with an international line up to dream of. Check out top notch underground house, techno and bass vibes from Hackman, Bristol’s 808-driven house project New York Transit Authority, South London Ordnance, Tessela, Goldffinch, and Amsterdam’s own Cinnaman and Presk (live).
Tune in for all this and more at RBMARadio.com
Participating artists:
Graphic Surgery x Aroy Dee
The Things We Are x I Am Oak
Collin van der Sluijs x Mike Mago
Max Grunfeld x Cardboard Motel
Sasa Ostoja x Jameszoo
Freshco x Sotu the Traveller x Boston Strip
Olivier Vrancken x Kajan Chow
Dennis de Groot x INT

---

Title: Ten Electronic Extroverts from the Middle East and South Asia, Part 1
Author: Andy Votel
Date: 2013-03-28
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/03/ten-electronic-extroverts-from-the-middle-east-and-south-asia-01

Ten Electronic Extroverts from the Middle East and South Asia, Part 1
When we asked Finders Keepers boss Andy Votel if there were enough artists making strange and wonderful early electronic music from the Middle East and South Asia to put together a list, he asked if he was only allowed to name ten. When he turned in this feature, we found out he wasn’t kidding. Votel easily found ten extraordinary artists that were just as pioneering in their own way as the Moogs, Subotnicks and Schaeffers of the world.
We’ve had Votel offer his thoughts about horror music soundtracks in the past for us, so we knew he’d be passionate in his writing. But we weren’t quite ready for the lengthy descriptions – and important asides that begged to be published. That’s why we’ve decided to break this feature into two parts. (Click here for the second part of Votel’s exploration of “The Indo-Magnetic-Carnatix, or The Splice Trail to the Electronic East.”)
İlhan Mimaroğlu (Turkey)
Not unlike the North American electronic composers Bruce Haack and Ruth White, Turkish electronic tape-music pioneer İlhan Mimaroğlu found his first phonographic audience amongst children, making sound effects for fairy tale records and family adventure stories. As one of the earliest non-European exponents of musique concrète, Mimaroğlu’s adventures would eventually take him to the heart of the experimental electroacoustic music scene from where he would command unanimous respect as an electronic music pioneer and purveyor for over 50 years.
Having failed to follow in his famous father’s footsteps as an architect in his teenage years, but succeeding in his studies for a law degree, Mimaroğlu would finally channel his suppressed interest in music by literally working backwards, wholeheartedly embracing music technology and worrying about formal composition afterwards. In 2006 he told Bob Gluck, “New music, that’s what interests me.... You have to start with what’s going on today and then, gradually, go back to the past.”
Fiddling with the limited mechanical and electric devices around him led to a part-time job making sound effects by night. But it was his gig as a journalist for The Associated Press that got him to the West on a full-time basis. Mimaroğlu was offered a fellowship to study music journalism at the legendary Columbia-Princeton University where he would join the ranks of Suzanne Ciani and Dariush Dolat Shahi. The school’s electronic music facilities were among the most advanced at the time, and he took full advantage: Before the end of the ’60s Mimaroğlu was sharing needle time and US and Euro record racks with the likes of John Cage, Morton Subotnick, Tom Dissevelt and Walter Carlos.
Despite generating shallow waves back in Turkey (with the domestic Görsel Çalışma release) he would carve an important mark for the East in early electronic music with his vinyl appearances alongside Tzvi Avni from Jerusalem (for Turnabout Records) and collaborations with Turkish singer Tülây German (under the name Tract, for Folkways Records).
With an impressive “Western” discography of concrete, field recordings and synthesized music inspired by artists like Jean Dubuffet and writers such as Edgar Allen Poe, Mimaroğlu was eventually embraced by the major music industry as a jazz record producer for Ornette Coleman, Charlie Mingus and Freddie Hubbard. He used the proceeds from these projects to found his own Finnadar label which provided a welcome platform for a wide range of female electronic artists such as Doris (Sorel) Hays and Suzanne Ciani as well as previously untravelled music by Turkish performers like Meral Güneyman, İdil Biret, Bülent Arel and ace-face percussionist (and Don Cherry collaborator) Okay Temiz. It’s safe to say that Mimaroğlu blazed a trail for Eastern Electronic experimental music and magnetic tape artists for generations to come... a vital ingredient in the Splice trail?
Usha Khanna (India)
Out of all the popular musical media outlets of the Middle East and Southern Asia, the Bombay film industry is probably the most triumphant in its global recognition and financial success. But in spite of its forward-thinking approach, it’s still by-and-large a male-dominated industry in terms of music production. Back in the late ’70s, Bollywood counted only one female arranger and composer amongst its wide and varied list of soundtrack writers. This solitary female composer? Usha Khanna.
It was in fact during a hiatus from working with Bollywood’s leading horror film directorial team, the seven-strong Ramsay brothers, that one of the big-time male composers, Bappi Lahiri, made way for Khanna to produce her first foray into synthesiser and drum machines with the soundtrack to the bloodthirsty Poltergeist rip-off Hotel. This led to other disco-infused and sought-after LPs such as Divorce, 7 Bijliyaan and Shama.
Khanna was by no means an exclusively electronic artist, but for a short time she contributed to the industry’s desperate penchant for sci-fi top lines and Star Wars Meco’isms before the novelty settled back into gold shell-suits and hat-stand singalongs, accentuated by that all important feminine touch. Probably her greatest work, though, is Hotel. The horror industry is where composers go to let their hair down (Morricone’s mad-cap Giallo excursions being a prime example), and with that soundtrack Khanna stuck a 240v synth cable into Bollywood horror’s main power supply.
Khanna, now aged 71, is still building on her own filmography of over 100 titles, but while she’s paved the way for a few, the micro-niche of female-electronic-horror-Bollywood composers is still a relatively leafless branch of the mighty Indian film industry.
Ashwin Batish (India)
Another off-road trail from the sprawling Bollywood Empire leads to Ashwin Batish who, like İlhan Mimaroğlu, solidified his musical career in America. (Ashwin’s family moved from Bombay, via London, to Santa Cruz in 1973.) As the son of the pioneering Bollywood film composer S.D. Batish (who had also innocently assisted The Beatles with their pervy East-ploitation fixation) Ashwan spent his early 20s spoon-feeding traditional Indian folk songs to world music fans as part of his father’s raga troupe until one day in 1985 he decided to smash the mould and don a baseball cap, a Yamaha DX9 and an E-Mu Drumulator and bring his own brand of electro raga rock to the body-popping population of Northern California.
Cutting a privately pressed 45, Batish released the tracks “Bombay Boogie” and “India Beat” complete with studio snaps of himself surrounded by reel-to-reel machines and a self-flattering credits list. Within a few months Ashwin formed a three-man crew with his brother Ravi and token white dude David Harnish who brought a second DX9 to the party.
Their eventual album was a homemade slice of self-pressed ragas with domestic synthscapes and drumbox grooves, and it sold like hot cakes. Who knew home listeners wanted seven rides of a reliable one-trick pony that often lapped the paddock in lengthy nine-minute bursts?
That isn’t to knock a winning formula: This project was the first of its kind, and – spread over the 45, LP and compact cassette formats – it was easy for us all to own a piece of Ashwan’s sitar magic before some otherworldly hipster inevitably stumbles on the same routine and starts touring the experimental festival circuit. In other words, Batish had the Now Sound down pat!
A BRIEF SNACK BREAK BACK IN THE WEST
What shall we have? Hmmm, how about some spiced popcorn? When Jean-Jacques Perrey first made his switch from the Ondioline electric keyboard and began to embrace Pierre Schaffer’s radical experiments with tape manipulation, his rapid advancements to melodic tape composition and popular music didn’t go down too well amongst the avant-garde cognoscenti.
From the vantage point of today’s struggling major music industry – which repeatedly force-feeds an imagined target audience via social media, TV and fashionable peer-pressure tie-ins – it’s encouraging to harken back to an era when scientific tape experiments could be marketed and successfully sold to open-minded listeners that were eager to put them on at their next cocktail party.
As our technical abilities evolve does our discerning taste devolve? Does the triumphant quest for perfection kill the chase? Are we spoilt brats? In 1967 Perrey made the first steps to the gentrification of electronic music... He polished the concrete! He pondered the improbable, saw his goal, put in the hours and cracked the code.
He was a genius undoubtedly. But, sadly, in this equation, there was no accounting for taste. Concrete with a beat? So at the height of his career, and with the historic Moog landing in the rearview, there was only one title for his frequent production partner Gershon Kingsley’s flagship anthem of corny pop... “Popcorn”!
Was the buttery bastardisation of Schaffer’s craft verging on the sacrilegious? Or did he live to regret that he didn't lay down the last piece of the puzzle? The final ingredients that would destroy man-made melody for the rest of eternity. The straw that broke the electric camel’s back...
Omar Khorshid (Egypt / Lebanon)
When the greatest guitarist of the Arab world, Egypt’s Omar Khorshid, recorded a cover version of “Popcorn” it was if he was taking İlhan Mimaroğlu’s “...start with what’s going on today and then, gradually, go back to the past” quote literally. Khorshid had devolved with spectacular and confusing results: This version of “Popcorn” sounded like it had been recorded 20 years earlier by Duane Eddy on an Egyptian cruise ship with Metal Mickey having an emotional breakdown in the pool. If Pierre Schaffer had missed the boat, then Omar Khorshid had missed the point. And I wouldn’t miss this party for the world!
It's difficult to get from one side of a Middle Eastern flea market to the other without encountering an Omar Khorshid album or cassette. The fact that he was a famous actor, a member of the boy band The Tiny Cats, an Egyptian movie soundtracker and the primary guitarist for the legendary and inimitable singer Umm Kulthum secured him unanimous recognition across the continent. In other words, if anyone could afford a Moog it was Khorshid.
His songs were syndicated in Central Europe, packaged alongside the music of Elias Rahbani (Lebanon), Farid Elatrache (Syria) and even Sohail Rana (Pakistan) as part of the touristic and mildly insulting “belly dance” genre. The increasing amount of electronic elements in belly dance music through the ’70 is often attributed to Khorshid’s synthesised flourishes, which are best exemplified in his guaranteed floor-fillers “Rakset El Fadaa” and “Guitare El Chark.”
Like early rock ‘n’ roll or vintage cabaret music, the sound of Khorshid’s dance band is raw, direct and transportable with high-octane passages that allow for the other musicians or dancers to catch their breath. Breaks... with plenty of room for electronic keyboards.
Dariush Dolat-Shahi (Iran)
Despite starting nearly a decade apart, both İlhan Mimaroğlu and Dariush Dolat-Shahi were valued students of Middle Eastern descent studying electronic music at Princeton-Columbia University. Furthermore, they both went on to release uncompromising records for Smithsonian Folkways – albums I consider to be some of the best from the company’s expansive discography. Entitled Electronic Music, Tar and Sehtar, Dolat-Shahi’s 1984 Folkways album was actually put into motion by his professors. They played his final college project to the label, and they instantly agreed to release it.
Dolat-Shahi studied and played in Iran, Holland and America, and unlike many of the other artists on this list he’s never diversified into the jazz and pop realms. But compare Dolat-Shahi and Ashwin Batish’s records, and you’ll find some common ground. Each artist sounds like they could have been recorded in 2013 as a cut-and-paste reaction to a heightened awareness of previously untravelled Anadolu pop and Persian folk-rock music. The key difference, though, is that Batish and friends jammed along to automated machines in a pop and rock style, while Dolat-Shahi was faithful to the academic principles of experimental electronics, using modular synths without keyboards and splicing hundreds of pieces of tape together.
Dolat-Shahi recently explained to me that he would put together a single reel of tape for months at a time, working through the night when no one was using the hugely expensive studios. “It wasn't until the final playback that I would know how the music would turn out. It could have been disastrous,” he told me across his dining room table.
The very fact that I was at his dining table is kind of amazing. After a long-running obsession with Dolat-Shahi’s music had led to a number of dead-end threads between Tehran, Amsterdam and California (before working directly with Folkways records to re-issue his rare LPs), I was delighted and surprised to be contacted by his wife from a UK email address! I’m in Manchester, so I was anticipating a lengthy journey down south to meet him. But when we agreed to meet up and I got his address, I found it was just four miles from my own house. Alive, well and in good creative spirits, Dolat-Shahi still writes, makes music and creates visual art.
Click here for the second part of Votel’s exploration of “The Indo-Magnetic-Carnatix, or The Splice Trail to the Electronic East.”

---

Title: An Oral History of Electronic Music in East Germany
Author: Florian Sievers
Date: 2013-09-09
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/09/east-german-electronic-music-oral-history/

An Oral History of Electronic Music in East Germany
Between 1981 and 1989, about a dozen LPs of electronic music were released within the confines of the German Democratic Republic. Ranging in sound from cosmic GDR disco to Baltic Balearic, these quirky, dreamy and spacious tunes now seem almost far-fetched to have originated in a country with such impermeable borders. The GDR’s electronic pioneers managed to flee their home – not in body but in mind, through the use of synthesizers, drum computers and samplers. Some of these tools were extraordinarily hard to obtain, and so only a select few specialists were actually able to practice their art and release their music in 1980s East Germany.
The records in question are far from canonical. They are a forgotten side-branch on electronic music’s tree of evolution – but one that has grown its share of wonderful obscurities. Sprawling, psychedelic Kraut jams, synthesizer epics and heart-wrenching disco cuts exhibit an astonishing array of influences and inspirations – incredibly worldly in spite of their makers’ confinement to a land in which electronic music was not tolerated by the state-owned record label.
The fall of the Wall has left its mark on each and every one of these pioneers – be it for better or for worse. Today all of them live in the outskirts of Berlin. Paying them a visit means manoeuvring through highway crossings, abandoned industrial complexes, allotment gardens and carefully trimmed hedges. This is a journey into the periphery.
Reinhard Lakomy
Like everyone else, I used to secretly watch West German TV, and one day in the mid-’70s I saw Tangerine Dream in a TV show, playing in a castle in England. I’d never heard sounds or rhythms or sequences like that before. I was totally speechless! In 1980, Tangerine Dream then paved the way for electronic music in East Germany with their concert at the Palast der Republik. They even put on a laser show, an absolute novelty here. And no one here had ever experienced anything like their sound system before either. But that wasn’t just new here but in the West, too. Overnight, that kind of music became incredibly popular.
Paule Fuchs (Pond)
Well, Tangerine Dream didn’t have any lyrics, so the officials reckoned their music was unpolitical. I think that was one of the reasons why they were allowed to perform in East Germany. None of the officials felt there was any danger, which was also an advantage for me personally because I never had to make any statements or justify myself. Other bands had to put up with lots of official lecturing and change loads of their lyrics, but as an electronic band you were spared because there were no lyrics. Before that, we as Pond had played so-called bombastic rock: Emerson, Lake and Palmer; King Crimson; Yes; and so on. But everyone got tired of it after a couple of years. I once saw a picture of Klaus Schulze somewhere, of him sitting on the ground in his spacesuit with a helmet on, surrounded by masses of keyboards. I thought, “Wow, that’s what we’re gonna do!”
Frank Fehse (Key)
I wanted to make music without the need for a drummer, vocalist or guitarist. But not necessarily something like Pond or Lakomy. I guess you could call what we did with these electronic instruments “pop music.” Outside the rehearsal room, live, we saw the audience really enjoyed it too, because it was very rhythmical and had phrases you could relate to, not just this dreamy, ambient, losing-yourself-in-sound sort of thing.
Jan Bilk (Servi)
Back then we were a church band. We always performed at church congregations at the weekend where we played meditative electronic music, and we also accompanied the service on Sunday mornings. So we had to play very quietly, without a drummer. Well, we didn’t want little old grannies keeling over. For that reason, and also because at some point we lacked the energy to bother about lyrics, as of 1982 we started playing purely instrumental electronic music. At Christmas in 1984, I remember it well, we went to an Intershop and bought ourselves the Amiga version of [Jean Michel] Jarre’s Equinoxe from the money we got out of the collection after the service.
Hans-Hasso-Stamer
What impressed me most was the technical side of the equipment. Fellow musicians I mentioned this to said: “Are you nuts? You need tons of equipment to make electronic music!” But I thought: In that case, start small. It doesn’t have to sound like Equinoxe from day one. So I began with pop songs, but without any vocals.
Jan Bilk (Servi)
All the state combines in East Germany had to contribute to the production of consumer goods. Some pretty strange concoctions came out of that: for example, the mechanical engineers and machinery builders in Cottbus produced a synthesizer, the Tiracon V6. The only problem was that they always lacked various components, so they didn’t have any chips for the synthesizer. But somehow they got hold of some from Robotron, who normally produced computers and portable radios, and had them sent to Cottbus.
Rainer Oleak
There wasn’t really any equipment that was produced in East Germany and you could actually use. Sure, we had our own synthesizers, but it was pretty tedious working with them. Well, for live gigs you had to cart them from A to B, and they didn’t like that at all. Something would invariably break. So you had to smuggle equipment into the country or get someone to smuggle it in for you. Everyone knew that, and everyone did it.
Paule Fuchs (Pond)
Getting hold of equipment was quite an ordeal. For a start, you had to earn loads of money to be able to afford stuff from the West. Then this money had to be “planed,” exchanged into West German marks. That was prohibited, and if you got caught you ended up in prison. The exchange rate on the black market was usually 1:6 or 1:7, but sometimes you only got 1:10. On top of that, you also needed someone to bring the gear across the border. Most people charged a hell of a lot for that, so you’d end up paying up to 40,000 East German marks for a synthesizer. Just to put that into perspective: my mother earned 400 marks a month. It was totally out of proportion. But I made other sacrifices: I only had a single pair of jeans, the rest of my money all went into buying equipment.
Julius Krebs
Every East German musician was chasing after West German marks like the devil after souls. Not with the intention of buying a pair of jeans but to get hold of new gear. The next problem was getting it into the country. A member of one of my former bands was married to a Chinese woman. Her passport allowed her to travel to West Berlin whenever she wanted, and as a foreigner different customs regulations applied to her. Between the two of them, they imported masses of equipment into East Germany. He probably became a millionaire just from doing that.
Hans-Hasso Stamer
I once gave this guy – you’d probably call someone like that a dealer today – 13,000 East German marks and then didn’t hear from him again for ages. Of course I was really worried the money was gone. In winter I was told to come to a certain place and he appeared with a Yamaha keyboard under his arm. It was hair-raising!
Jan Bilk (Servi)
We once had a gig in Bautzen, and when we got there, there was this really big cardboard box. Inside was a Moog Prodigy, brand new! We later found out that a Jesuit priest from Cologne had collected money in his parish and had sent this synthesizer over. It was like Christmas for us!
Franke Fehse (Key)
When you’d mastered the first hurdle, it got a lot easier. Because you could sell your old equipment to other musicians in East Germany who didn’t have such good connections, and with the money you got from that, afford to buy something new. Once the wave was in motion, it was quite bearable, actually. That’s how I managed to afford relatively modern gear from the West, and because I was so well equipped I often got jobs from radio stations as a studio musician. It was ironic: we could hardly get hold of such instruments, but musicians who had such equipment were very much in demand, even from state institutes.
Paule Fuchs (Pond)
Well, in East Germany it was simple – if I may exaggerate a bit: every village had its own club. And every weekend a different band would play, it cost three marks to get in, and that’s how they got the kids off the street. The program was always very varied and people came no matter who was playing. Well, what else was there to do at weekends?
Everyone was immediately enthusiastic about our new electronic music programme, even the older churchgoers.
Rainer Oleak
The audience didn’t care if it was electronic music or whatever. Music was music, and it didn’t bother them who was playing that night. There wasn’t a special scene for electronic music: everyone was pretty open-minded and just glad to hear something different for a change.
Julius Krebs
Since it was all regulated by the state, you could always be sure you’d get paid, which was excellent nurturing ground for sound experiments.
Paule Fuchs (Pond)
There weren’t any drugs, none whatsoever, zilch, absolutely nothing. I was part of the music scene for a heck of a long time, but I don’t know of a single incident involving drugs. Anyway, where should they have come from? All we had was alcohol.
Jan Bilk (Servi)
Everyone was immediately really enthusiastic about our new electronic music program, even the older churchgoers. And you can’t get any better conditions than in a church. The audience is open-minded, responsive and grateful for everything that is offered to them. And, what’s more: the location itself gets them to concentrate.
Julius Krebs
As far as I know I was the first person in East Germany to perform live on stage with a Commodore C64 and a 303. As a monitor for the C64, I used a Russian TV set. But these computers were terrible because they kept crashing. At one of my concerts, it crashed seven times! What could I do? I had to resort to playing something by hand while I rebooted the computer. The audience was fascinated because they could see that someone was really making an effort. They were thrilled and knew that the sounds were being computed at that very second.
Jan Bilk (Servi)
Sometime around 1982, at a church concert we once put our C64 on the altar, plus an old Robotron TV set. Looking back, that was heresy, but we were so fascinated by the idea that it didn’t occur to us at the time. The cursor moved along with the music, which we wanted everyone to see, so we put the TV set on the altar. But no one in the audience understood what we were doing.
Hans-Hasso Stamer
In the early days I still had an analogue sequencer and had to set each step on a turn-dial pot. I’d bring along a voltmeter and quickly reprogram my sequencer between each track. Just imagine!
Frank Fehse (Key)
We always thought about what sort of additional visuals we could offer. At the end of the ’80s, at one of our concerts in the Palast der Republik, two guys came up front and started spinning around on the floor in front of our stage. We’d never seen anything like it before. It looked awesome! When the gig was over, we asked them if they’d perform with us. So we changed a few of our songs, and they’d breakdance to them. A rather unusual sight in East Germany in those days.
Paule Fuchs (Pond)
We always wore overalls on stage. Well, we had to offer the audience at least something. Before that we wore a kind of bathrobe made of silk, but that always looked so effeminate. What we really wanted was something like a spacesuit, like the one Klaus Schulze wore. My wife had a flight suit, so we had two copies made and that went down really well. But I kept getting fatter – and by the way, so did my rather slim colleague – and that meant we constantly had to have ever-wider inserts sewn into the sides so the suits still fitted.
Hans-Hasso Stamer
In the West, lots of electronic musicians just went about doing their own thing in home studios and never actually performed live. In East Germany it was different: if you didn’t come from a music conservatory, you first had to play live for years on end to prove yourself and show that you were consistent before they let you make a record. An LP was like a knighthood.
One day we came up with the idea of bringing out our own record. A totally absurd idea, almost like saying: “I’m going to build my own rocket and fly to the moon.”
Rainer Oleak
I got to know Lakomy in 1981. At that time he had just brought out an electronic record and was on good terms with the officials. Our record [Zeiten] was pretty experimental for its time. And thanks to Lakomy having so much influence, we got away with it. Let’s face it: nobody gave a toss about sales figures in East Germany. Certainly not the record company. Lots of things didn’t sell well for the simple reason that they were produced in such small quantities. And most musicians made a living from live performances.
Reinhard Lakomy
People always make out as if we were way behind the times in East Germany. But what one forgets is that we had really high expectations in East Germany when it came to culture. Anything that was published was checked right down to the very last detail, also with regard to the technical aspects. Well, if the truth be known, we simply didn’t have enough material. There was always a shortage of something. In Gotha [the nationally owned printing factory where the covers for Amiga were printed] they’d scrape every last bit of red out of the corners, just to make sure they could add a bit more color.
Frank Fehse (Key)
Our record also featured two cover versions: one of Jan Hammer’s “Crockett’s Theme” and Harold Faltermeyer’s “Axel F.” I had suggested these to Amiga, and much to my surprise they agreed. After all, both songs were hits from the West. The guys from Amiga probably speculated the record would sell better if they included them.
Paule Fuchs (Pond)
With “Planetenwind” we suddenly became famous from one day to the next. They even played it on the radio, we were in some kind of charts, we performed on TV. I never claimed I was a great composer, but I’m hard-working. And I always say: success proves you’re right. My song was played on East German radio stations or on TV every single day. Anyone who lived in East Germany at the time knows it.
Jan Bilk (Servi)
One day we came up with the idea of bringing out our own record. A totally absurd idea, almost like saying: “I’m going to build my own rocket and fly to the moon.” But we were dead set on it. In Erfurt there was a place called “Arbeitsstelle für pastorale Medien” (Centre for Pastoral Media), run by the Catholic Church of East Germany. They had a very good mixing desk, two Studer tape recording machines and some effects equipment. That’s where we recorded “Vertrauen.” We then sold the cassettes at our concerts and other church events, and one day we got a letter from someone at Amiga: suddenly they wanted our music! We signed a contract with them, the first that a private production company had ever signed with the state-owned VEB Deutsche Schallplatten. We negotiated the price and it was as if we were capitalists. None of us knew how much one could charge, so we demanded a utopian sum – and a utopian sum is what we got.
Reinhard Lakomy
German Reunification changed everything: anything that was of value here or once expensive became worthless, and our biographies were dismissed as slightly inferior. At the same time, everyone was so overjoyed about the abundance of electronic music that I felt it was no longer essential for me to continue. There was a glut of instruments with factory settings that allowed just about anyone to make music. Which was good and I was not the least bit sad about it. But I was looking for something unique, something not everyone could do. So this excursion had somehow come to an end.
Hans-Hasso Stamer
After German Reunification, everything disappeared in a kind of vortex. Either you had the energy to say, “Fine, that’s the end of that, I’ll just start again.” Or you didn’t have the energy. I’ll be quite honest with you: I didn’t have the energy. I went over to writing poetry and playing the piano.
Jan Bilk (Servi)
Church work had always been oppositional. We as a church band didn’t actually experience any repression, everything seemed perfectly normal. But what is normal? We didn’t have anything to compare it to, didn’t know any different. We only noticed there was a wall somewhere that stopped you from going any further. It was like a thick fog that was ubiquitous. People don’t die of fog, and fog doesn’t really do you any harm, but fog reduces visibility. That had an effect on a major part of our lives. As far as I’m concerned, I’m glad it’s all over.
Translation: Intro - Anthony Obst, Oral History - Carol Christine Stichel
Header image © PONDerosa Records

---

Title: Gallery: Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab Moscow 2013
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2013-12-10
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/12/moscow-synth-lab-2013-gallery/

Gallery: Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab Moscow 2013 Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Vladimir Kuzmin lecture at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Malcolm Cecil at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Malcolm Cecil at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Love Cult at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Lidiya Kavina and Love Cult at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Elektromoskva film screening at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Dinos Chapman at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Andrey Smirnov lecture at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Acid Symphony Orchestra at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Andrey Smirnov lecture at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow Acid Symphony Orchestra at Red Bull Music Academy Synth Lab 2013 - Moscow By Red Bull Music Academy on December 10, 2013

---

Title: Ash Koosha’s Music Subconsciously Embodies His Politics
Author: Hanna Bächer
Date: 2016-07-28
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/07/ash-kooshas-electronic-politics/

Ash Koosha’s Music Subconsciously Embodies His Politics
The Iranian producer on his early efforts making electronic music
Even for those who haven’t heard a single note of his music, the story of Ashkan Kooshanejad is nothing short of incredible. Born and primarily raised in Tehran, his interest in music could often only be satisfied via black market media and clandestine shows away from the watchful eye of the Iranian government. As a student at the Tehran Conservatory of Music, he was one of the only people working primarily with computers, and outside of the classroom he furthered his education while performing in rock-oriented bands, much to the dismay of the authorities.
After seeing several of his friends, colleagues and bandmates beaten and/or arrested, and once serving in prison himself, Kooshanejad sought asylum in the UK, where he continued making electronic music and eventually adopted the Ash Koosha moniker. His self-described “nano compositions” found a home on the Olde English Spelling Bee imprint, which quietly released his debut LP Guud in 2015. The intricate and utterly unique record set the stage for an even more fascinating and complex album, 2016’s virtual reality-inspired I AKA I on Ninja Tune. In this excerpt from an interview with Hanna Bächer on RBMA Radio, Koosha discusses his start in electronic music and the unforeseen integration of his productions and politics.
When did you start playing electronic music in Iran?
I always played electronic music, but it was in my own personal space. There wasn’t a platform in Iran to play that kind of stuff. I would keep it for myself, experiment and learn more, but also be involved with different bands, from jazz to rock to any kind of combination we could make. Music that is in the film No One Knows About Persian Cats, with that band Take It Easy Hospital, is not all me, but it’s me being in a group, or working with others. I’ve done this kind of band thing different times with different people. It’s just all adding to my experience as a producer.
Take It Easy Hospital, which was formed by me and a friend, Negar Shaghaghi, were doing music that back then was kind of new to the Iranian scene. It was kind of electro indie rock. When I met the director, he was looking into other acts, but then when we performed in the studio for him right at that moment he was impressed. Obviously, it was a story, because it was right after I came out of prison.
After that, do you attempt to embody politics in the electronic music that you’re making now?
I really want to say no, but it comes out. It pops out in my music, because generally speaking – not politics specifically from Iran, but generally around the world, us as a species, the bigger picture – I’m always involved with these kinds of thoughts. It naturally comes into my music. Even if I’m not thinking about it, there is some elements you can see. There is some aggressive Iranian rhythm that pops out in the music, and later on I listen to it, and I say, “Whoa. This is exactly what I hated when I was a kid.” It was like the Iranian authorized music, or the thing that I was running away from, but it comes out in my music in a really aggressive way and it makes it interesting. That kind of groove is meant to be very cheesy and danceable and you could party to it, and it’s kind of tacky. But from my channel, it comes out really aggressive and emotional. It makes a really weird balance. The politics, the social issues, come out somewhere in the music.
I’m open to working with anything and anyone as long as it’s going to change the rules.
I’ve said this a lot: there is poetry in electronic music, but the poetry in electronic music is the manipulation and processing of sound. When a producer is sitting there doing loads of processing on a certain stem or sound or recorded voice, that’s when the poetry comes in. In one instance, they just twist a knob, and that’s it. That’s the feeling, that’s the moment, and I think in the background it’s connected to a lot of personal issues and emotions and psychological angles. It’s interesting how now I see it more and more every day, that electronic music has its own kind of poetry.
Has there ever been any exploration by you to work with rappers?
Yeah. I always think I’m going to do collaborations with different people, like vocalists, rappers. I’m open to working with anything and anyone as long as it’s going to change the rules. As long as it’s not rap – it’s something post-rap, or a step forward. It’s important to me to have that kind of perspective.
Is there an Iranian rap scene?
Yeah, there is. There are a couple of rappers. There’s one guy that I’m close friends with. His producer, these two are the ones that I always check in with, always. He’s called Hichkas. They call him the rap god of Iran, like the father of rap, because basically him and his crew brought it to Iran and made it more social rather than commercial. They were underground. I think Iran’s population is around like 90 million; I think at least 80 million people listen to him. There is no Iranian person that I’ve met that doesn’t know him. So far, I would say 100 percent. Also, he’s underrated, because Iranian culture is not popular at the moment around the world. It’s a bit hard times for Iranians. I’m doing this project with him, maybe later on, that me and another producer are going to do. It’s kind of a Death Grips vibes, but we’re going to do crazy electronic music.

---

Title: Blood Orange on the Connection Between Music and Dance
Author: Dev Hynes
Date: 2016-11-21
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/11/blood-orange-dance-and-music/

Blood Orange on the Connection Between Music and Dance
In this excerpt from his lecture at RBMA Montréal, Dev Hynes discusses finding happiness while dancing
Watch Dev Hynes’ full lecture from RBMA Montréal here.
At [Brooklyn Academy of Music], they were letting me use their studio to dance in, whenever there’s no one there. They have a piano there, so I bring my stuff and record these improvisations.
The piano on “I Know” was from an improvisation that I kind of chopped up and made into that song. I mean, it’s always kind of... If there’s any equipment or a studio somewhere I can use, I’ll use it. I’m so impatient that a lot of the times things on my albums are the way they are almost because I’m so impatient. If there’s a song on my record where it’s me playing all the parts, it’s because I wanted that song to exist in that moment. If there’s another singer on it or another bassist, it’s because they were there or they could come in the next hour and make it happen. Same thing if I had a piano: If I owned a piano, I’d probably do an entire piano album. I had a day in a studio with just a bass and drums, I’d probably do a whole album on just bass and drums.
In that particular moment, it was more I was just taking a break and just playing the piano. That song actually has a dance video to it that I made a couple years ago and haven’t put out yet, because I’m a freak. Piano and dance – it’s a very connected thing in my mind.
Honestly, I’m maybe at my happiest when I’m dancing. It’s really so pure. It used to be pretty separate, the dancing aspect to the music aspect, for me. Once I started slowly pushing them together, I started becoming more comfortable musically, especially performance-wise. It usually takes a lot for me to perform, but then once I started incorporating more dance into it, I started feeling a lot more comfortable. This song really did stem from dancing. I was dancing for maybe four or five hours before I went to the piano. It was still heavily on my mind, so I then choreographed to that piece. They exist in my head as one and the same.
I’ve done some stuff with dance but never something that’s full-on ballet. Actually, the video for “I Know“ featured Maria Kochetkova, who dances with SF Ballet and ABT. I am really interested in all of that, but my thing is that I’m trying to take steps. I have a full respect for a lot of these things, and I don’t want to just dive in. I’m kind of inching my way towards a lot of these worlds, so that it’s not just like “Blood Orange: The Ballet.” No one wants that. I want to take my time and pay my dues.
