Red Bull Music Academy — Drum & Bass / Jungle

Source: Red Bull Music Academy Daily (daily.redbullmusicacademy.com)
Citation Tier: 2 (established music publication)
Articles: 6

---

Title: Rescued From The Fire: Basso
Author: Basso
Date: 2011-09-22
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2011/09/rescued-from-the-fire-21-basso/

Rescued From The Fire: Basso
An ongoing series in which we ask artists the record they’d risk life and limb to save from a burning inferno
I've been thinking too long about how cruel it is to save only one record when you can carry at least 50. Now I'm sitting here in hell and it's my pleasure to report about the last record I had in hand before the burning timbers entered my skull as if I was Waldo Jeffers. Of course, I've been trying to be smart and grab some of the ones I wouldn't find again easily... One that means something to me, touches me or simply has expanded my horizon.
So, I reckon I would pick something like the 1979 private pressing from a German group called Kaarst. They named themselves after a small town (42,000 inhabitants) near Düsseldorf and released three LPs during their career. The one that I would save was their last and it's called "Hier Spricht Man Deutsch" (transl. "German is spoken here“).
The album meets all of the above mentioned criteria. I'm pretty sure I won't see another copy in ages, because I've already found three copies in the last eight years and my luck should have run out by now. There are two tracks that I enjoy so much that my eyes get wet every time I hear them. Both of these tracks are quite melancholic and of course dedicated to ladies who have probably touched [vocalist] Reinhart Firchow's heart… But it's not only the music and his voice that makes this record special – the lyrics are absolutely fantastic in my humble opinion. Very bright, personal, honest and upright. Unfortunately it's in German and most of you wouldn't understand a word. It really is a pity!
But what I like most about the record is that it is not a cool record. It opened my eyes to folk music, esoteric shit and other stuff that's not necessarily cool. I'm so damn thankful that this finally happened. My life became a lot more beautiful with all those uncool records of mine that are now, sadly burned.
Check the record out here. But beware...

---

Title: Maiden Bass
Author: James Pants
Date: 2011-11-02
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2011/11/bass-test-james-pants/

Maiden Bass
As someone wise once said, “all frequencies are created equal.” That may be true, but for at least the last decade or so, bass has been running the show. Our Academy shipmate, James Pants, recounts the first time he made contact with the lower regions of sound below…
"Warning: Mega Low Bass. May Damage Speakers and Cause Possible Loss Of Hearing."
I’ve always lived a pretty sheltered life. Both of my parents were (are) Presbyterian minsters, after all. However, if I remember correctly, I think I was somewhere around age 16 when Joshua blew his proverbial horn and the walls of Jericho came tumbling. That was the year I bought my first semi-automatic BB pistol. It was also the same year I subscribed to the Victoria’s Secret catalogue for recreation. But most importantly given my current position in life, it was the year I discovered real bass.
I chalk up at least two of these awakenings to Dan Mellon, a certain, rather unlikeable classmate of mine who happened to be the first in our class to possess a car. This small, sun-bleached red Civic of his gave Dan a small circle of short-term friends. I was one of them.
Though the car was nothing to brag of, Dan had tricked it out by adding two 12” subwoofers to the back, and since this was the first occasion I had seen subwoofers, let alone heard them, the excitement was thick. When Dan debuted his system before a small group of us in a garage, he popped in some music and it hit me. Hard. The bass was so low that a certain feathery tingle crept from the base of my neck down to my groin. I remember getting the same exact feeling when I first saw Alyssa Milano. Someone asked Dan who it was in the deck…
“Techmaster P.E.B.”, he replied.
Now, if you’re asking yourself who Techmaster P.E.B. is (like I certainly was at the time), you’re missing out on an entire music movement in America from the late 80s on to the early noughties. An important genre in the canon of bass: the subwoofer test album. As a stripped down, mostly instrumental offshoot of the sprawling Miami Bass scene, the subwoofer test albums preceded the rise of dubstep, UK bass, and jungle as uniquely low frequency genres. There was a legion of Floridian pioneers like P.E.B., Maggotron, Magic Mike, Dynamix II, DJ Deep and Bass 305 among others pushing the boundaries of the brown note with a slew of albums peppered with warnings about the physical dangers of playing the music. A challenge really.
Caution: Contains Ultra Low Frequencies. May Destroy Stereo.
Danger: Bass May Shatter Glass. Eye protection recommended.
Fantastic, these hazards. We became obsessed with putting paper airplanes near Dan’s speaker cones and seeing how long they would float. We stuck our heads deep into the woofers to feel our hair follicles vibrate.
At the time, cassettes from these dangerous musicians could be found in bulk quantities at ailing department stores in our town for about 99 cents. Faced with this goldmine, we bought everything. Never mind that my friends and I didn’t have subwoofers of our own – we blew cheap Magnavox boomboxes on the regular. Albums on labels like Jamron, Pandisc, Cheetah, Avenue, Newtown, 4-Sight, Suntown, and Joey Boy all made it into our collection. Most were just compilations with unimaginative titles like, The Bass That Ate Miami, and Bass: Slow, Dangerous and Illegal. Most likely it was illegal to put out this kind of music if the album’s title didn’t have “bass” in it. That was the point, right?
Regarding the actual music, it wasn’t particularly good. There were no discernible melodies. There were often no vocals. Sometimes there was a pitched up voice saying, well, “bass.” And if you were listening on a boom box, you couldn’t hear anything at all but what sounded like a poodle nibbling foil. We didn’t care. Maggotron was good. We liked him.
One day Dan announced that we were no longer allowed to put our heads inside the cone, on the account that he had found blonde hairs in the speaker. We were tired of the scene anyways, as it had gravitated towards no music at all – just naked sine waves at differing frequencies. No drums. No voices. Just bass. Like some depraved Berlin sex addict, the actual intercourse had lost its meaning, and all that was left was latex and spanking. It wasn’t as much fun any more. We missed the voice of the tiny little man on the cassette saying “bass” over and over again. We declared the uniquely American subwoofer bass-test genre dead amongst ourselves, went back to The White Album, and forgot about Dan.

---

Title: Gallery: Red Bull Music Academy Bass Camp Beirut
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2012-04-24
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2012/04/bass-camp-beirut-gallery

Gallery: Red Bull Music Academy Bass Camp Beirut Lecture session with DJ Zinc Lecture with Young Guru Lecture session with DJ Zinc By Red Bull Music Academy on April 24, 2012

---

Title: Berlin Stories: Stefan Goldmann on Berlin’s Thriving ’90s Drum & Bass Scene
Author: Stefan Goldmann
Date: 2013-09-06
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/09/berlin-stories-stefan-goldmann-drum-n-bass

Berlin Stories: Stefan Goldmann on Berlin’s Thriving ’90s Drum & Bass Scene
In this personal essay, avant techno and house producer Stefan Goldmann reminisces about his entry into the world of electronic music
The first time I got introduced to drum & bass was through TV. There was a Berlin cable station called FAB that used to get the rights to three or four video clips and then play them forever. It was never mainstream stuff. I remember they had Chick Corea Elektric Band. On rotation. At some point they started showing Shy FX’s “Original Nuttah” and a Photek remix of Therapy?, some grunge rock band. I had never heard anything like it – outer space, alien music. It was the first electronic music after Tomita’s “Pictures at an Exhibition” that really struck me.
I eventually found out about a place named WTF, which was one of the first drum & bass clubs in Berlin. It was the first proper club I ever visited. The door opened and the first thing I saw was Shy FX. I was in shock. I didn’t expect to get close to such a TV celebrity. FAB was probably a channel that reached 500 people, but I was starstruck.
The place was packed, and it was at this beautiful moment where people still hadn’t figured out how to dance to drum & bass. Everybody was moving differently. Three years later and everybody was marching in sync. You also still had girls in the club, which later on was … not the case. It was a wonderful introduction to clubbing because it was brand new for everyone. It wasn’t a thing where you were introduced to a scene that is already established and you need to find out the rules.
My friend Mike, who was a drummer, gave up playing afterward. He was like, “I can’t compete with these beats.”
There were several clubs and parties at that time, all promoting different angles. Some would push a Metalheadz sound, others would be into Bristol stuff, jump up had its fans too. Hard:Edged was one of the major parties at the time. They had a residency at WMF. Toaster was a cellar club in Mitte. I saw Ed Rush play there. I think it was his second gig in Berlin. For the first half hour or so he played what my friend called “optics” – tracks where you’re totally flashed by the sound design. Even today I feel nothing surpassed drum & bass in that domain. I always loved the “intros” to the DJ sets – hardly any DJ started with the tools. The first five records were always meant to set the mood.
It might seem strange that Berlin had a really good drum & bass scene. It didn’t have the same sort of ethnic background as London. Berlin never had a significant black community. Once on a school trip to London, a friend and I sneaked out at night and went to see the Metalheadz session at the Blue Note. There were these black girls in sportswear, dancing incredibly smooth moves to banging breaks. There was a culture this music could build on that was missing in Germany, so the angle over here was different. Many of the DJs who were leading exponents – Bass Dee, Feed, Bleed who is an editor for de:bug – all had a Detroit techno background. They all ran around with UR sweatshirts. Those aesthetics are related I guess: Music that was urban, distorted and worked really well in a dark basement. It fit quite well I think. The same people also used to print fantastically designed fanzines. It’s sad that the scene faded away before it managed to breed any significant producers.
When I started DJing, I started out as a drum & bass DJ. I organized a party with a friend in a basement club called Acud. We earned like 100 bucks on the night so we thought, “Cool, we actually can do parties and survive it!” For the second event, we invited Matrix, who was my favorite producer at the time, and his set exceeded my expectations. My friend Mike, who was a drummer, gave up playing afterward. He was like, “I can’t compete with these beats.” He ended up becoming a programmer at Native Instruments. Some of his bass synth programs became the foundation of a lot of UK bass music. And EDM. But that’s a different story.
Drum & bass had an effect on people who would end up doing something totally different later on. I remember Kristiina Tuomi being obsessed with “Quadrant 6,” a super dark track by Dom & Optical… Unfortunately back in the club with Matrix there were only 100 people. We lost a ton of money – and I gave up on promoting – but it was almost a luxurious private experience to have that set performed just for a couple of friends.

---

Title: Gallery: RBMA Bass Camp Vienna 2013
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2013-11-21
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/11/bass-camp-wien-2013-gallery/

Gallery: RBMA Bass Camp Vienna 2013 Bass Camp Wien 2013 Vienna Bass Camp 2013 The Cinematic Orchestra live at Bass Camp Wien 2013 Patrick Pulsinger at Vienna Bass Camp 2013 Cinematic Orchestra lecture at Bass Camp Wien 2013 Vienna Bass Camp 2013 Ankathie at Vienna Bass Camp 2013 Legowelt at Bass Camp Wien 2013 NVIE Motho, Ankathie, Sixtus Preiss, Judith Filimonova, Kentrix at Vienna Bass Camp 2013 Mimu and Ritornell at Vienna Bass Camp 2013 Four Tet watching Dorian Concept live at Bass Camp Wien 2013 Salute at Bass Camp Wien 2013 Wandl at Vienna Bass Camp 2013 Sluts'n Strings & 909 at Bass Camp Wien 2013 Aplot and Mr. Dero at Vienna Bass Camp 2013 Four Tet live at Bass Camp Wien 2013 Burgtheater at Bass Camp Wien 2013 The Cinematic Orchestra live at Bass Camp Wien 2013 Bass Camp Wien 2013 By Red Bull Music Academy on November 21, 2013

---

Title: Gallery: Bass Camp Vienna 2016
Author: Stella Kager; Lupispuma Com
Date: 2016-02-01
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/02/bass-camp-vienna-2016-gallery/

Gallery: Bass Camp Vienna 2016
The Red Bull Music Academy Bass Camp took over of the Austrian capital once again, establishing a creative environment at Hotel am Brilliantengrund, and putting on four shows in the city’s flagship venues.
Twenty hand-picked participants from all over Austria were put through their paces by local and international creative pioneers, such as Oslo’s house, disco and edit gourmand Todd Terje, revered Ukrainian pianist and composer Lubomyr Melnyk, Vienna’s own sonic explorer Fennesz, Academy alumnus Jamie Woon, Berlin’s techno stalwart Shed and breakbeat maestro DJ Zinc, alongside many others.
During the day they attended lectures, workshops and studio sessions, and in the evenings, they brought the unique vibe of the Red Bull Music Academy Bass Camp to the dancefloor of Vienna’s Grelle Forelle, Pratersauna, WUK and RadioKulturhaus. Check out some highlight shots below.
