Red Bull Music Academy — DJ Culture & Sound Systems

Source: Red Bull Music Academy Daily (daily.redbullmusicacademy.com)
Citation Tier: 2 (established music publication)
Articles: 11

---

Title: DJ Harvey: Debut LP and free Com Truise remix
Date: 2011-09-12
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2011/09/dj-harvey-debut-lp-and-free-com-truise-remix/

DJ Harvey: Debut LP and free Com Truise remix
Please welcome DJ Harvey: cult leader, DJ extraordinaire, the missing link between Wang Chung and Danny Wang, and one of the last true party adventurers. Please welcomeGerd Janson: a brother-from-another of Harvey’s when it comes to touching the MK1200, a record label-owning music journalist (Groove, Spex), and a team member for this year’s Red Bull Music Academy.
This is a conversation between Janson and the big boy of all things Balearic, originally published in the ultra-obscure 8inch magazine a couple of years ago and now dug outta our archives as a little taster of what will be going on in Barcelona (and on this very website) from September 21 to October 24.
Known for his perfect timing and butter smooth mixing, when it comes to selecting odd Balearic tunes, contemporary house, disco classics or obscure beauties of any kind, Harvey has always been on the forefront. Be it together with Gerry Rooney and the infamous Black Cock joint venture for rearrangements or his remixes and re-edits for the likes of Super_Collider, The Brand New Heavies, Disco Dub Band and Ramsey Lewis, this British-born Hawaii expat never ceases to amaze and is constantly at the mercy of nerds from all over the world. His Moist parties and the almost everlasting residency at the Ministry of Sound saw more shindigs than the Roman empire and were summarized in the Late Night Sessions mix for MoS. This is still as much in demand as stories about the legendary New Hard Left jams, he ran afterwards, and records by his new project Map Of Africa.
Gerd: Harvey, if someone does an internet search with your name, he opens a whole can of worms. On internet forums like www.djhistory.com, you achieved a god-like status as cult leader numero uno for all the odd ones out there. How do you feel about that reputation and the need of your fans to have every single song and track on your numerous mixes identified that are floating around?
Harvey: Yeah, it’s definitely crazy and flattering. I don’t really check any of them out. I’m not that computer friendly though I do like to cruise eBay. I think it’s great that people are interested enough to want to find out what the tracks I play are – I play some pretty crazy shit. Get ready for the next. I always thought, once someone finally got all the tracks it’d be time to do another – I’m not sure anyone has yet though.
Gerd: You moved – when exactly by the way? – from London to Los Angeles. What were your main reasons, apart from the better weather?
Harvey: I’ve been out of the UK for quite a few years now though I spend my time between upstate NY where Thomas (of Rub’n’Tug fame, ed.) and I record, LA and Hawaii. I try to spend two weeks a month there at my gallery/club. It was time for a change more than anything. I was doing really well in Europe and some people thought it was suicide but it’s been a creative rebirth – it’s always good to change it up.
Gerd: How is the scene in LA at the moment? Speaking from hearsay there seem to be some nice things going on, especially if one looks to San Diego and the Lounge Candela’s thing. What is the story about that one?
My mom used to play great records to me as a kid. I’m lucky, I am surrounded by friends and experiences that constantly inspire me.
Harvey: LA is a strange beast, I get my jollies, but as far as regular goes it’s almost best to not play there too often. It’s crazy, there are literally millions of people in LA but the scene can be really small. There’s a bit of a driftwood mentality there too. If someone is successful, they kick anyone off their bit of wood that shows interest or is perceived as a threat. The positives of LA far outweigh any negatives. Our annual beach party at Zuma is pretty hard to beat. I’m pretty sure there is nothing like it anywhere in the world. San Francisco has some great parties, Candela’s is small and oh so good, LA is great for the one-offs and the crazy Hollywood scene. There’s great radio in America too – I see myself organising so many more things out here – Hawaii will turn into a destination and I’d like to get some kind of once a year happening together there.”
Gerd: Hawaii seems to be the perfect place for having a party in this world.
Harvey: A space in Hawaii is a dream come true. Other people made it possible for me, just turn up and lord over really. Right now, we are trying to get some sound system sponsorship to beef it up and we are finally in a position to invite guests to come and play. We are a gallery space and showcase great cutting edge art, often overlooked in Hawaii. Christmas and NYE is a big time for us and we plan to have a great exhibition up for that period as well as some great nights planned. I would advise anyone thinking of taking a break at that time to come to Oahu. You can check it out at www.thirtyninehotel.com. We’ve been getting some nice press we have been featured in the Hawaiian Airlines in-flight magazine for a few months.
Gerd: Could you please describe a little bit of your musical background? For instance, what were your first steps as a DJ or musician, what were your favourite artists or DJ’s and how did the whole dance music thing start for you?
Harvey: My mom used to play great records to me as a kid. I’m lucky, I am surrounded by friends and experiences that constantly inspire me. I was a drummer in punk bands from a really young age, John Peel played our stuff on the radio when I was 13. Then I took the same route most people my age did getting a pair of decks and cutting up breaks – I was a crew’s DJ which is really how the whole Tonka thing came about: I was a better DJ than a breaker or graffiti artist.
Gerd: What was the Tonka Sound System?
Harvey: We were a collective of alternative-type DJs and musicians, set designers, sound people, and we put things together purely for the love of playing. It was almost like a cult (laughs) with lots of cute small girls running around, as I remember. Myself, Chocci and Rev were the main DJs and we spawned a whole generation of DJ’s like whole The Idjuts, Garth and Markie. We would haul those big yellow speakers all over the UK. We played the Zap in Brighton once a month then afterwards we’d haul the speakers onto the beach at Black Rock and party till the sun came up and beyond and nobody bothered us. David Sims took some great photos of the Tonka crew I’d like to get my hands on.
Gerd: Nights like Moist, New Hard Left or your tenure at the Ministry Of Sound are legendary and seem to have had a huge impact on a whole generation of British selectors. What was your point with those nights, what were the legendary happenings and did you always like to mix things up and serve a different meal than your counter peers?
Harvey: Heidi (Harvey’s wife and partner, ed.) was really the brain and the balls behind those things, she always sees really well what’s happening next, we would talk about people like Larry and Francois and she would say: “Lets find ‘em and get ‘em to play. They are artists. All they want to do is show their craft and be appreciated.” Then she would be out all over the place spreading the word to the fashion freaks she was associated with. Believe it or not, at the time it wasn’t an easy sell for any of those nights. We were putting DJs on all night long when you could go to a club round the corner and see one an hour for 6 hours. We had to destroy a lot of people’s perceptions, and she convinced the clubs that it was a good way to keep evolving. She’s doing her thing now in LA. She had Madlib, Peanut Butter Wolf and J-Rocc to play a Grammy party she organised – they tore the house down and it was one of the best nights LA has seen this year. You had the likes of Quentin Tarantino, Jay-Z, Mos Def, Tony Alva at one end of the room and friends from London like Frank Tope and Basement Jaxx at the other all going crazy for these guys. Usher and RZA were freestyling through the headphones at one point. Yeah, that girl really does know how to throw a party.
Gerd: Together with Gerry Rooney and your Black Cock joint venture, you were also at the forefront of the whole edit mania – at least in Europe. What do you think about the whole edit business nowadays? “Edit” here and “edit” there, seems to be all the rage since the computer mouse substituted the razor blade.
Harvey: I was aware of the whole edit thing that came out of the US and Paradise Garage scene. There were tracks I would play two copies of or record them to the reel to mess around with as I was DJing – and re-editing for me was just an extension of that. When you have a residency you are playing records week after week breaking new stuff and it’s a way to keep things fresh and exciting and put your personality on the music that people are getting to know. I was into disco loops at that time and funnily enough some stuff I had made for myself was made into actual tunes that were released. I was never comfortable doing that, so much of that stuff got put out credited not to the original artists but the DJ. Some producers made quite nice careers out of it.
Gerd: What are current producers, musicians or disc jockeys you fancy listening to?
Harvey: I always have a great time hanging out and listening to Thomas and Eric (Rub’n’Tug, ed.). I’d like to hang out more with some buddies more than anything. People like Ivan S and Romain, the mad crew in Oslo, Norway. Gerry and I could play records to each other for weeks and still not get through ‘em all. We’re trying to get hold of a bunch of people to come and play with me out in Hawaii, when they’re stateside. I know, people out there would love to hear the likes of those guys and people like Gilles Peterson, Norman Jay, Francis Kevorkian.
Gerd: What is the story with your new project Map Of Africa? Which label will it be on and when can we expect something that is not “white label”?
Harvey: It’s myself and DJ Thomas. It’s our band. We have finished an album and are just putting the sparkle on it. I sing, the first 12” is just out on Whatever We Want Records, and it’s really just a hand-to-hand thing. The next single, everyone tells us, is great and then the album will follow that. We’ve been asked to do live gigs and we will do a few next year. We had a few rehearsals with our band in NY, and it’s pretty exciting stuff. It’s a family affair. Carlos (Noordinarymonkey, NYC, ed.) who owns the label is a great friend, I designed the artwork and Michael K of Stussy is getting the merchandising together – I designed a great t-shirt. We’re really pretty fucking dangerous musically… well, in everything really. I wouldn’t want to be our tour manager.
Gerd: You have been DJing for quite some years now. Have you ever reached that point, where you were so fed up with the whole circus that you wanted to become a Carthusian monk?
Harvey: I always avoid the circus, I’ve been on the brink of it a few times, but then I always disappear off up my arse. I live a pretty nice life. I get to do what I like, when I like, how I like if there’s no waves in Hawaii and the guest DJ’s have been taken care of, I can go to New York. When I’ve damaged my liver partying in NY, I can head off to LA. I’m constantly running off.
Gerd: As one of the pioneers of the genre, why did the “Balearic” thing come back so heavily? Are people tired of the same old, same old 4/4 patterns?
Harvey: I never stopped playing so called Balearic music – I play so much of that stuff in LA and California people really dig it out there – it goes so well with the feel and climate of the place. At the annual beach party I always have a moment where I think this is what people think Ibiza will be like: all beautiful people dancing on the beach to amazing chilled out tunes. But then you have perfect waves here out in front of you with dolphins swimming around. I play Balearic music the world over in fact they really get into it in NYC too, but there you have to mix it up with the ugliest heaviest shit anyone ever heard – you know it’s the light and the dark and I like to push it all the way both ways (laughs).
(Special thanks to Heidi and DJ Klas.)
For some more Hawaiian wisdom, check out DJ Harvey’s lecture session from the Melbourne Academy here.

---

Title: Drug Dub 1989-94
Author: Joe Muggs
Date: 2012-07-24
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2012/07/drug-dub

Drug Dub 1989-94
Joe Muggs explores the altered states of early British rave’s interzones
This is about liminal zones, about what’s revealed when categories melt down, about the fractal edges of culture – and about all those other places you find yourself inhabiting when you’ve done too much acid. By my reckoning, 1989 to 1993 or 4 (as well as coinciding with my late teens) are the years when the British rave scene was, if not unified, then at least orbiting the same strange attractor. And during that time, the place where you could find the most overlap, the most blurring between sub-sects and scenes, was in the back rooms where people were so hopped up, blissed out or just plain fucked that they’d listen to anything. This is where tempos dropped and rules relaxed, and producers and DJs went right out on a limb, united across scenes by lysergic curlicues and a constant low-end pulse of dub.
Remember that the maddest experiments of The Orb and The KLF began in the backroom of Paul Oakenfold’s Land Of Oz right at the heart of acid house’s mainstream. You only needed to jump through two degrees of separation to get from the urbane wideboys at Boys Own to the crusty festy faves The Magic Mushroom Band. Even the nascent jungle scene had its trippy elements and connections, with the Bristol side of things in particular inexorably tied up with the traveller/free party scene. (I’ve written more about these links here, and there’s a mixtape of tracks from this era I did here.)
There’s so much else that I could have put in this list – I’ve missed out Depth Charge, Renegade Soundwave, Psychick Warriors Ov Gaia, Underworld, LS Diezel & Digidub, William Orbit, Smith & Mighty and, er, The Purple Fluid Exchange. Indeed, I could easily have filled the list with 15 Andrew Weatherall productions or remixes without compromising on quality. Of course there’s a lot to laugh at here: these tracks are mainly made on rudimentary technology, they’re sometimes rhythmically clunky, and most of them are well over seven minutes long. But they do all represent a period of brilliantly unselfconscious exploration and willingness to take ideas to their logical conclusions and a long way beyond. Whether it was because of genuine social and cultural upheaval, or just because everyone was completely off their tits all the time, I’m not sure, but it was good. So, lie back, plug in your brain machine, and prepare to enter hyperspace.
The Sugarcubes - Birthday (Justin Robertson Dub)” (1992)
The vocal version is glorious too, but minus Björk you can see the workings, and observe in detail how British drug culture tried to adopt the things it admired – in this case dub, house and hip hop – got it wrong, and created something distinctively its own instead. The twangy, possibly synthesised, bass guitar tone is totally wrong for dub, the trumpets sound plastic, the chugging progressive house riff is incredibly dated, the echo effects have none of the sense of rusty, dusty rawness you hear in a King Tubby or Lee Perry production – but somehow, all together, it works. It helps – a lot – that it’s laced with some of the most infectious hooks of the time, but really it’s about sheer bloody-minded creativity transcending limitations and making something that’s more than the sum of its parts.
Original Rockers “Sexy Selector” (1992)
Yes, it actually is sexy. The opening track from the mainly excellent Ambient Dub Vol.1, the album that documented the scene around Birmingham’s Oscillate club, it encapsulates a world of beanbags, 360º lightshows, ‘smart drugs’ and ‘brain machines’ – but it is also shot through with the sensualism that came with lying around very high on ecstasy, acid and weed. It’s all about the pitch-bend: the warm sub-bass glissandos, the soul vocals pitched down into androgynous moans, the Radiophonic analogue swoops all give a sense of being in that state of reduced gravity existence, of things swerving and merging into one another, of lazy, easy physicality. Original Rockers made other great tunes, notably the international dub-house hit “Push Push”, and later did alright with their rather jolly Rockers Hi Fi tunes, but this remains their masterpiece. I actually played it in the small hours in a large festival tent last year in a rave slowdance moment, and the way couples moved closer showed that it still has the same charge it did two decades ago.
Bandulu “Run Run” (1994)
Another sultry slow-motion one, not a million miles from the Original Rockers track – but this, with its “run run run/revolution come” call to arms also captured that moment around the Criminal Justice Act when there were explicitly political stirrings in underground music. Bandulu had always been an interesting act: rooted in hip hop, graffiti and b-boying, full of London rave attitude to their performances, able to mix it in the most uncompromising techno sweat-pits like Club UK and The Orbit, but tied to the indie-Balearic axis around Creation records, and happy playing at the hippiefied likes of Club Dog too. There was more spirit to them than most and a thoroughly rebellious streak to their output – but this captures that never-resolved tension between believing what we were doing was subversive and revolutionary and the hedonistic desire to lie back, space out and lose ourselves. Listened to from one angle it’s about confidence in the inevitability of transformation; from another it’s the sound of the revolution dissipating in clouds of smoke.
Spiral Tribe “Track 13 (Criminal Drug)” (1992)
And talking of the contradiction between energised rebellion and druggy solipsism, here’s the motherlode. Spiral Tribe represented all that was best and worst about the sense of rave as counterculture: naïve idealism colliding with rampant aggression, egalitarianism with cult-like hierarchies, flabby mysticism with fearsome focus and drive – and their music embodied all the contradictions. Their collective producers made a lot of terrible, zombified, ket-head techno; the dreamy Orb-sampling “U Make Me Feel So Good” (actually by Charlie Hall & Lol Hammond of The Drum Club); and some pretty fearsome gabba, but they were at their best when they plugged into the emergence of jungle (don’t forget it was a Spiral Tribe producer – Earth Leakage Trip – who made the first ever release on Moving Shadow). This track captures the edge-of-the-world feeling of their raves: the vague anti-authoritarian slant of its samples are there as much to add to the nerviness of the atmosphere as to send any direct message, the dub pulse constantly threatens to erupt into double-time hardcore mania but always remains in a state of thrilling tension.
Friends, Lovers & Family “Hyperspatial Confusion” (1993)
Another of those crossing points between porous scenes, Rising High Records released untold classic hardcore rave tunes, but also ambient (Mixmaster Morris’s Irresistible Force), experimental electronica (The Black Dog), German techno and the beginnings of British trance. Friends, Lovers & Family would sadly later gravitate to the latter, but for their first three EPs on the label they epitomised the under-determined nature of British rave, blending awe-inspiring breakbeat science with an intensely psychedelic approach creating a mutant hardcore/proto-jungle comparable in weirdness and wonder to A Guy Called Gerald’s Juicebox experiments. This run culminated in the Being EP featuring “Razors Pain You” – as good a Dorothy Parker-sampling acid jungle tune as you’ll ever hear – and this nine minute ambient-dub-breakbeat excursion which wears its pyschonautical space suit with pride. “We are now entering hyperspace,” it announces. “The laws of physics do not apply.” And who were we to argue?
Maurizio “Ploy (Battersea Was An Island Of Mud Mix)” (1993)
So, so many Orb tracks we could throw in here (the intense “A Floating Leaf Always Reaches The Sea Dub Mix” of Killing Joke’s “Requiem” was a very close second), but this one makes the cut as a demonstration of how close their wacky and way-out ways always were to what was perceived as much more ‘serious’ techno. With Thomas Fehlmann as one unusually steady part of the loose and constantly shifting lineup around Alex Patterson, they were wired right into the heart of the German scene, so the hook up with Basic Channel’s Maurizio alias of Moritz von Oswald here was not surprising. And Patterson always had a taste for the Teutonic anyway, citing one of the earliest influences on The Orb as an experience with Killing Joke in Neuss, North Rhine-Westphalia, listening to Brian Eno’s Music For Films on LSD and watching “the Ruhr steel works explode in the distance.” This track has all the usual Radiophonic squiggles, kooky voiceover samples and dub throb of classic Orb, but also Basic Channel’s absolutely exquisite synthesis and techno drum machine patterns rising in and out of its fabric.
Full Moon Scientist “Old Man River’s Crying” (1993)
The hinterland between scenes was a natural home for music industry chancers and cheeky chappies, and a history of the UK’s downtempo dance music would be packed with some truly sparkling and occasionally diabolical characters. Full Moon Scientist were a duo of an ex-Marc Almond collaborator (Steve Rowlands) and the founder of the mid-80s skiffle-bluegrass-rockabilly band The Boothill Foot-Tappers (the late Kevin Walsh), and they appeared to be having massive fun as they threw everything and the kitchen sink at their gloriously cluttered dub on Leftfield’s Hard Hands label. Much like The Orb, they compulsively blurred, or even rubbed out, the fine line between pisstake and passion – as if to acknowledge this, a later album was called Do We Look Like Comedians? – but it was abundantly clear that they knew their dub, and that they knew what it was to be very, very, very stoned for great lengths of time. This percussion laden dub waltz lament is, it goes without saying, pretty weird – but it’s also pretty beautiful.
Jah Wobble’s Invaders Of The Heart “Rising Above Bedlam” (1991)
Glastonbury 1992: it’s a long time ago, so don’t blame me if I have these events slightly in the wrong order or am exaggerating somewhere – but this is how I remember it. Jah Wobble had played a fine set, went off, came on for an encore wearing a white silk jacket and – ever the geezer – proclaimed “there, worth yer £90 ticket just for a glimpse of the threads eh?” Oh we laughed at his patter and at those who had paid the ticket price (these were the days you could still pay a Scally a tenner to usher you under the fence). Then he brought on Sinead O’Connor and did a massive “Visions Of You.” This was earlier in the set and it’s heavy, but really not a million miles from the crusty dub of the time, either – honestly, look up some Radical Dance Faction aka RDF videos, it’s only the amphetamine tooth-rot lyrical fury and double-time ska elements that separate them from this. Hippie music, with a lot of attitude, that leads with the bass.
Bang The Party “Rubbadubb” (1990)
I had no idea what the Back To Prison album was, what a classic the sultry “Bang Bang You’re Mine” on it would become, who Kid Bachelor was, or their connections to the pre-acid evolution of black British house music when I stumbled over the record in 1990 – but I instinctively fell for the weirdness of it all. This track, made entirely of drumrolls and echoes, still sounds great. It’s minimal in the truest sense: just variations and intensifications of the simplest of rhythm patterns and basslines, definitely of a part with the Sheffield bleep of Unique 3, LFO, etc that was emerging at the same time, but woodier, more organic sounding, definitely closer to dub as I understood it. Just as with Smith & Mighty tracks of the time, it’s very easy to listen to now and hear both the rolling rhythms of jungle latent in its hypnotic echoes and a direct connection to the industrial continuum of Adrian Sherwood, Meat Beat Manifesto and co.
Pulse 8 “Radio Morocco” (Adrian Sherwood Mix) (1989)
Pulse 8 was David Harrow, journeyman keyboardist, producer and tattoo nut who would crop up all over the place in the uncertain zones of club music, notably with Andrew Weatherall in Bloodsugar; here he was joined by Jah Wobble and Justin Adams. The single was the first on Nation Records which would for better or worse be the home of ethno-dub fusion through the 90s (throwing up the occasional cracker by the likes of Loop Guru, Tribal Drift and Asian Dub Foundation), though it would also get a release on 4th & Broadway via Virgin, thanks to the Youth mix on the A-side being a spanking early British house floorfiller. But it’s Adrian Sherwood’s mix that sounds like the real killer now – his dub studio craft and the industrial edge he honed with Tackhead, Mark Stewart and Keith LeBlanc are all brought to bear on an acid house track that swerves all over the shop. It’s the epitome of the smash-and-grab approach to source material of the time, but its Maghreb melodies are deployed artfully, and Sherwood’s production just sounds bigger and badder than most of what was around at the time.
The Shamen “Hyperreal Selector” (1991)
There’s not much Shamen in this; really it’s about Meat Beat Manifesto who did the remix. Of course MBM were one of the vital pollinators, adding industrial weight and dub to breakbeats, with the genes of “Radio Babylon” echoing through hardcore and jungle right through to the present day. This remix was one of those great disorientation points in music, a real ’wot u call it’ moment; I can't remember whether this came before or after ’We Are IE’, but it was certainly one of the very first tracks to cut the breakbeat so it was completely free from the regular 2-and-4 snare pattern – and I THINK it was sampled and sped up by Hackney Hardcore for Dancehall Dangerous making it a direct influence on the birth of jungle as such. Regardless of where it fits historically, though, it still sounds bananas: rough, ragged, and from a place light years left of centre.
Meat Beat Manifesto “Psyche Out (Sex Skank Stripdown)” (1991)
…whereas this flips MBM upside down and inside out, smooths off their rough edges and shows just how slick it is possible to be in this territory. This is perhaps the most perfect club groove of Andrew Weatherall's glorious early period, providing a link forward into the trance-induction of his early Sabres Of Paradise tracks. Every element here is incredibly simple: like so much of the “dubby” stuff of the time, the bassline is shockingly mechanical and amelodic compared to real reggae, just a see-saw between two notes and a rhythm right on the grid – but it doesn’t matter. This is brilliant minimalism, with that bassline, the rhythm programming, the snippets of harmonica and orgasmic female voice all intermeshing, making interference patterns that ebb and flow with no sense of climax or destination over eight mesmeric minutes.
The Moody Boys “Pumpin’ Dumpin’” (1990)
Tony Thorpe was one of the lynchpins of all this; he provided the studio skills for much of The KLF’s biggest work, his remixes for them – especially the Misty In Roots-sampling version of “What Time Is Love” – were masterpieces, and his own Moody Boys tracks were ubiquitous in certain quarters. This is from the Journeys Into Dubland EP he made with The KLF’s Jimi Cauty; the lead track “Free” was the one played everywhere, its repeated opera singer refrain burrowing into the collective subconscious, but this was the one to dive deep into. There’s almost nothing to it – just a Stone Roses loop, a snippet of Jungle Brothers, a detuned bleep melody that pre-empted Royksopp’s “Eple” by a decade – but the insistence of the bass, the subtlety of the dub treatment, the Nu Groove sense of house hypnosis, and a real don’t-give-a-fuck refusal to be anything other than itself make it a sublime groove.
Coil “Windowpane (Astral Paddington Mix)” (1990)
This one I first heard on a fistful of the most gigantic liberty caps I’ve ever seen, still dew fresh off the Yorkshire moors, and more than any other track from the time, unpicking the actual sounds on the record from the experience is almost impossible. But then Coil were always designed to be heard in that way anyway, so it’s all good. In their “Love’s Secret Domain” (GEDDIT?) phase, they tried to turn their daemonic industrial hands to the dance music of the acid house era, and never quite hit it – but they did make some spectacular sounds. And in this track in particular, they really highlighted how close the tone generation and signal processing of the industrial-psychedelic lineage came to real dub. Even if none of the rhythm or tonality here has anything to do with reggae, the final construction and the obstreperous spirit of the thing are closer to King Tubby and Scientist than the vast majority of more “authentic” reggae/dub tracks of the ’90s.
Greater Than One “Dub Killer” (1991)
Digging around to find the provenance of some of these tracks, one great pleasure was looking at old ravers’ forums and seeing how many hated this track for “spoiling their buzz”. “We try to find it in drugs and in sex and we get all mixed up and get all fouled up and before we know it we’re destroyed” goes the sample, and I guess that could bother the more naïve or humourless raver – as could the loping breakbeat that’s far too slow for the hardcore of the time. But as with “Mr Kirk’s Nightmare,” most people I knew just found it hilarious, and “before we know it we’re destroyed” became a late night catchphrase for many. It was an odd departure for GTO, who were in transition from rather clunky goth-industrialists via brilliantly euphoric rave classics like “Bullfrog” and “Listen To The Rhythm Flow” to the ridiculous gabba excess of their Technohead alias, but a welcome one for anyone who liked it slow and low. I know people who insist on starting DJ sets with “Dub Killer” to this day, and, well, as a statements of intent go it’s a pretty unequivocal one.

---

Title: H∆SHTAG$, Episode 2: Don’t Call It #PostDubstep
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2013-02-06
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/02/hashtags-postdubstep/

H∆SHTAG$, Episode 2: Don’t Call It #PostDubstep
For this second edition of H∆SHTAG$ – our web series chronicling Internet-based music – we examine the ever-changing bass/garage/dubstep continuum and the role the web has played in its maturation and ubiquitous global reach.
For the last few years, a Sisyphean battle has been waged on the globe’s blogs and comment sections for and against the bass-heavy sounds pouring out of myriads of Soundcloud accounts, U-Stream broadcasts and Ableton sets. And while the audio target has always been on the move, the obstacle has more or less stayed the same – namely “what do we call this?”
For this second episode of our H∆SHTAG$ series, we examine the ever-changing bass/garage/dubstep continuum and assess the role the Internet has played in its maturation and ubiquitous global reach. Is there a genre such as post-dubstep? Can there ever be a global movement without a local scene? And why do people spend their evening uploading woozy bass house tracks with pictures of women in their underwear to YouTube? Artists including Mount Kimbie, Praveen Sharma and Machinedrum of Sepalcure, Bondax and Deadboy weigh in alongside Dave Hayes of Soundcloud, Thristian bPM of Boiler Room and noted journalists and bloggers.

---

Title: Red Bull Launches Living Archive of Club Culture
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2013-10-10
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/10/red-bull-launches-living-archive-of-club-culture

Red Bull Launches Living Archive of Club Culture
As part of the festivities around the November Revolutions in Sound event at the London Eye, Red Bull has launched a living archive of club culture.
Powered by Google+, the website aims to provide an interactive and ever-evolving map that unlocks some of the vibrant and varied club history in the UK, showing the connections between landmark clubs, artists and venues. To kick things off, the focus is of course on the club nights involved in Revolutions in Sound next month. But, if you’re a member of Google+, you’ll soon be able to contribute memories, photos and more. Check out the website at archive.revolutionsinsound.com for more details.

---

Title: Interview: Chico Dub on the Next Generation of Brazil Producers
Author: Todd L Burns
Date: 2013-12-02
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/12/chico-dub-interview-title

Interview: Chico Dub on the Next Generation of Brazil Producers
Last weekend we hosted our final Bass Camp of the year in São Paulo. We’ll be providing some more coverage of the event in December, but we thought it best to provide some context of what’s actually happening in Brazil at the moment. To do so, we asked festival curator and compilation compiler Chico Dub a few questions to get a sense of the country’s scene – one that he says is more vibrant than ever. As the man who puts on the forward-thinking Novas Frequências festival and puts together the series of compilations called Hy Brazil, we figured he’d be the one to know best.
Can you briefly outline your history in music, and what projects you are involved in right now?
I started to work in music after I quit my job as a copywriter in advertisement agencies. That was around 2004. Then I became deeply involved with my biggest music passion ever: dub (hence the nickname). Be it Jamaican, British or German, that’s my thing. It’s funny because looking back at that time, I was already doing what I do right now: curate, produce and promote events outside the national mainstream. The main focus back on the days was on my DJ sets and parties, but I also put out two art exhibitions inspired by dub music and did a documentary with my friend Bruno Natal about dub’s influence in electronic music and hip hop. Dub Echoes did a pretty good job in documentary festivals, some top advanced music festivals (such as Sónar Barcelona and Berlin’s CTM) and even got exhibited in São Paulo’s Art Biennial. But the biggest prize for sure was the Soul Jazz DVD, since after that it got distributed to the whole world.
After that I decided to learn a little bit more about cultural and events production. So from 2007 until 2011 I worked as an assistant director in a Rio de Janeiro-based audiovisual performance festival called Multiplicidade. I worked with Diplo, DJ Spooky, The Cinematic Orchestra, Daedelus, AntiVJ & Principles of Geometry, D-Fuse, Peter Greenaway, Arto Lindsay and dozens of national talents building this mix of visuals, art, technology and music. In parallel, between 2009 and 2011, I got back in DJ sets and club parties because of Dancing Cheetah, the first global guettotech/ tropical bass oriented night in Brazil. Kuduro, coupe decale, tecnobrega, baile funk, cumbia digital… All that stuff.
I feel that people abroad need to know that we have other stuff than bossa nova and tropicália. The legends are cool, but hey guys, this is 2013.
I got out from Multiplicidade in 2011 and started to work on Novas Frequências, that’s when I really got the click (unconsciously initiated in 2004) that my job here is to work with experimental, avant-garde and new trends. To always guide myself into doing stuff neglected from the local biggest events. The festival only brings artists that have never came to Brazil before, like Actress, Hype Williams, Pole, Sun Araw, Com Truise and Andy Stott. Festival’s third edition happens from November 30th until December 8th and the line-up features Tim Hecker, Stephen O’Malley, James Ferraro, Demdike Stare, Lee Gamble, Heatsick, David Toop, São Paulo Underground and of course some major new local talents (listen to Fudisterik! OMG!).
Novas Frequências got me the opportunity to work with Sónar in their São Paulo 2012 edition, undoubtedly the most incredible music festival done in Brazil for those in line with new trends/ leftfield music. In the same year I did a festival in Brasilia dedicated to the music of the Pará state – an incredible mix of folklore Amazon roots music that culminated recently in the tecnobrega phenomenon. And finally this year, with the Hy Brazil series of compilations, Novas Frequências third edition and a guest curatorship for Eletronika, the most important new trends festival in Minas Gerais State.
What are the unique challenges of running a festival in Brazil in your mind?
To me, the biggest challenge is competition. There are so many things going on in the country at the moment that you always have to ask yourself: how am I going to catch people’s attention? A couple of years ago we had about eight or ten huge international music festivals. The list dropped to about three in 2013. Tickets here are more expensive than the ones abroad. So people don’t have enough money to go to all of them. They have to make choices.
What was your aim with the Hy Brazil series of compilations?
The aim was to put some light in what’s going on in Brazil right now aside from the mainstream. To get these really nice artists out of their Soundcloud and Bandcamp accounts and show them to the world. That’s why I decided to give exclusivity to places like Spin, Dummy and Resident Advisor. I feel that people abroad, especially now with all the radars pointed to Brazil, need to know that we have other stuff than bossa nova and tropicália. The legends are cool, but hey guys, this is 2013.
You've said that we're seeing a second wave of contemporary electronic music makers in Brazil at the moment. Why do you think that is (aside from their age)? What are the circumstances in Brazil that have made it so vibrant right now?
It’s kind of hard to answer this question and to not talk about (their early) age. Well, actually the age doesn’t matter that much. The question lies in their generational behavior – they are so connected, smart and unafraid to experiment with everything they can. The result is the boldness in their music.
You said that people have their radars pointed at Brazil right now. Why is that?
It’s so rare to host the two biggest sport events in the world in a row – I guess that only happened once before. So with the World Cup in 2014 and the Olympics in 2016, and all the social and economy transformations that such huge events carry, people are more curious to find out more about Brazil. To find out what really happens in this country besides all the old clichés.

---

Title: Nightclubbing: Belgrade’s Industria
Author: Vuksa Velickovic
Date: 2013-12-20
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2013/12/nightclubbing-industria

Nightclubbing: Belgrade’s Industria
Vuksa Velickovic tells the story of how, as war raged around them, one Serbian club became more and more wild.
You’ve probably heard it already: Belgrade is Eastern Europe’s “ultimate party destination.” Unlike the “over-polished” Prague or Budapest, it is a place beaming with “realness” and subcultural flair, its nightlife apparently closer to that of Berlin than Bucharest. But it would be unfair to reduce the Serbian capital’s reputation solely to the media hype of Lonely Planet and New York Times articles. Some twenty years ago, in times of violence and political repression, Belgrade was as much of a party haven as it is today. Only back then, it was a different kind of party.
Much of the story about Serbian clubbing boils down to one name: Industria. It was the club that defined a generation of Belgrade youth and permeated the consciousness of every party-goer that roams the city today. However, it was the socio-political context – alongside some hard-boiled techno and a few flamboyant characters that made it a very special place indeed. The days when bullets were fizzing around in nightclubs, and gangs of thugs adorned in gold chains patrolled the streets will be remembered as some of the darkest in recent Serbian history. Oddly enough, in a bizarre interplay of urban idiosyncrasies, they were also Belgrade’s most extravagant.
At the peak of Milosevic’s power, Industria was opened.
A bit of background: In 1994, Serbia is run by Slobodan Milosevic and his oligarchic entourage with the generous help of the military, contract killers and gangsters. The country is not officially at war, but it sends troops mixed of conscripts and paramilitary divisions to neighbouring Bosnia & Herzegovina and Croatia. Sarajevo is effectively under siege and the Srebrenica massacre is less than a year away. Internally, the government is wrestling with the largest economic inflation in Europe since 1930’s Germany; amidst UN sanctions and international isolation, petrol is sold on the black street market, as is pretty much everything else.
The regime keeps a tight grip on the national media through a network of fabrication and lies, and aside from the official propaganda, the cultural landscape is dominated by “turbo folk” – a hybrid music genre mixed up of Balkan folk, soft porn and fantasies of glamour, providing an artistic backbone to the regime’s nationalist ideology. It seemed as if decades of Belgrade’s vibrant urban culture have been swept away. The same year, at the peak of Milosevic’s power, Industria was opened.
After a bleak first season, new management took over and put the club on its feet. The “Cosmic” residence on Thursday nights, pioneered by DJs Boza Podunavac, Gordan Paunovic and Vladimir Janjic, featured a sophisticated blend of acid house and early techno, pretty much unimaginable in Belgrade up until then. If the competing Soul Food club around the corner was catering to the softer, funk crowd, Industria bercame the refuge for a more courageous clientele.
If you were a regular, coming to the club was no different then arriving home to your living room.
It had everything you would expect from a world-class underground club. Situated in a basement of a large city bookshop, the 400-strong venue was just about the perfect size, never too big or too small, scarcely decorated, with pulsating stroboscopes, a banging soundsystem and a cozy lounge area. If you were a regular, coming to the club was no different then arriving home to your living room. Especially on a Sunday night. It also boasted one of the most charismatic door people in the history of clubbing: Loona Loo, today a well-known Belgrade TV journalist, whose cult status within the Industria’s provenance was only surpassed by the legendary “baba sera” (literally, “shit granny” – the old lady who’d supply additional toilet paper in the bathroom to needy clubbers).
After two steady seasons, in 1997, a younger, more energetic crowd was about to step in. And they needed a heavier sound. Kids brought up on a hefty diet of turbo folk and nationalist propaganda, were switching to hardcore techno. Teenage Techno Punks, a DJ duo made up of Marko Nastic and Dejan Milicevic who were yet to reach their drinking age at the time, quickly developed a cult following.
For the first time in Belgrade, 18-year olds were playing music for 18-year olds. Nastic’s straight-forward 4/4 techno set the pace for the city’s early electronic scene, while his technical competence in mixing earned him a God-like status in the eyes of fellow teenagers squeezed around the decks, following their idol’s every move in sacred devotion. Around this time, the parties were ending at 6 or 7 in the morning and Industria’s energy was soon to be channeled through the city’s repeating mantra of harder, faster, stronger.
Industria was the meeting point, a breeding ground if you wish, which could have turned your every all-nighter into an act of political resistance.
While escapism was part of Milosevic’s package, one should not underestimate the political potential of Belgrade’s youth. After all, the city created a public disobedience model for all subsequent revolutions to this day from Ukraine to Egypt – initially through three months of continuous protest in the autumn of 96-97 and, finally, in October 2000 when Milosevic himself was toppled. One of the most exciting things about Otpor – the student movement that proved instrumental in bringing down the regime – was the fact that its creative pool was not comprised of political managers but restless, creative spirits who popped pills on weekend nights. For many of them, Industria was the meeting point, a breeding ground if you wish, which could have turned your every all-nighter into an act of political resistance.
On the other hand, style and social leverage were always more important for the Belgrade youth than being part of any political agenda or cultural movement. That’s partially the reason why Industria never lived up to its political promise. After 1998, the atmosphere in the club started to change. Some of the frequent guests were not only Belgrade’s future officials, artists and independent-media personas, but increasingly, dubious, grim characters.
Industria opened its doors for the last time in 1999, the same year NATO bombed Serbia for almost three months. Belgrade was under curfew and drones were hitting targets in the city centre. DJ Vadim of Ninja Tune had to cut a gig short and play an encore the following day because of chronic power shortages. An apocalyptical mood was descending upon the country. When the chief of Milosevic’s special secret police units started frequenting the club and waving his gun out of amusement at teenagers, it become clear the party was over. A year later, both the regime and Industria would be assigned to the annals of history.
When the chief of Milosevic’s special secret police units started frequenting the club and waving his gun out of amusement at teenagers, it become clear the party was over.
As journalist Vojislav Tufegdzic noted in his 1995 book Crime That Changed Serbia, Belgrade in the ’90s “epitomised Chicago of the ’20s, the economic crisis of Berlin of the ’30s, the intelligence intrigues of Casablanca of the wartime ’40s, and a cataclysmic hedonism of Vietnam of the ’60s.” Milosevic himself ruled with a combination of iron fist and a certain authoritarian permissiveness perhaps most reminiscent of the Roman emperors. As long as his own power was not questioned, he allowed you to play as much as you wanted. But unlike some of the more flamboyant Neros and Caligulas, he would rarely step into the public, preferring to command from the TV screen like a true Orwellian character. Ubiquitous, but nowhere to be seen. He’d also let you imagine that everything you did – even dancing – was subversive.
After the regime was ousted, there was little left for subversion. Corporate money started rolling into Serbian clubbing, and the management of Industria decided it was time to move on. The club lived through one unsuccessful attempt at reanimation, and that was it.
In the meantime, Belgrade’s dance scene succumbed under the wave of sponsored entertainment and mass benders of all sorts. The city at last became “the ultimate party destination” everyone was talking about, at least in the eyes of the western tourist, fascinated by the endless strip of riverboat clubs and access to beautiful women. But Belgrade’s underground nightlife – the one that once spelled more than a Friday night binge – has been in a steady decline over the last several years. Some say the city has lost its flair, but everybody will tell you it can always spark when least expected. Maybe it’s time to start over again. Belgrade’s urban culture is ripe for a renaissance. Or even better, a revolution. It’s never too late.
Header image © Srdjan Veljovic

---

Title: Nightclubbing: Happy Days, London’s Sunday Scene and the Birth of UK Garage
Author: Stephen Titmus
Date: 2014-03-17
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2014/03/nightclubbing-happy-days

Nightclubbing: Happy Days, London’s Sunday Scene and the Birth of UK Garage
It started as a humble Sunday morning after-party but quickly inspired a whole host of events, and kickstarted one of London’s most culturally important music scenes. Yet more than two decades later, Happy Days’ influence is rarely given much credit.
Happy Days sprung out of AWOL: a legendary indoor mega-rave that ruled London’s hardcore scene in the early ’90s. D&B pioneers like Kenny Ken, Randall and Mickey Finn were residents. The atmosphere inside the club was edgy and the music was manic, proto-jungle. Closing time occasionally resulted in chaos as pie-eyed ravers returned to their cars to find them towed away by market traders.
It was a simple premise: Why not throw an after party to catch the crowd leaving Ministry of Sound?
Against the backdrop of thundering break-beat lunacy was a second room favoring soulful US house and garage. In 1992 Matt Jam Lamont was just one of hundreds of young kids trying to convince the back room promoter, Timi Ram Jam, to give him a shot. “I begged him to just give me half an hour in the second room,” Matt Jam explains. “I was literally, arms round him, dragging on his feet. He eventually said, ‘Oh, go on. Just get out of my face.’ I played for two-and-a-half hours, and from then on I was his resident.”
Timi left AWOL in 1993 to launch Happy Days. It was a simple premise: Why not throw an afterparty to catch the crowd leaving Ministry of Sound? Ministry, at the time, was arguably the best club in Europe. An ode to New York City, Ministry attempted to import the glamour and grit of The Paradise Garage to a grey area of South London famous for little other than a massive roundabout. The club had even gone to the huge effort of buying an identical sound rig to The Garage and had convinced New Jersey house godfather, Tony Humphries, to take a residency. It was an aspirational and American experience quite unlike anything UK clubbers were used to.
Contrastingly, Happy Days couldn’t have been more British. Its home was The Elephant & Castle – a decent sized, but ultimately unremarkable, pub with a large glass front. Timi converted it into a party venue by simply plugging in a chunky sound-system. From the get-go, it was packed. “The clever thing was to do it bang next door to Ministry,” remembers Matt Jam. “You could have done it a mile down the road and people would have been undecided what to do. Ministry finished at 9, and Happy Days ran from 10-2. People used to come out of Ministry and sit down and wait for The Elephant to open.”
People used to come out of Ministry and sit down and wait for The Elephant to open.
There were other after parties going on in the area, but by virtue of its location, Happy Days quickly became the most popular. Timi even took over a pub across the road, The Charlie Chaplin, just to deal with the overspill. “It was supposed to hold 200 people but we got 400 people in there,” says Matt Jam. “As soon you walked out, it was hard to get back in.” Those who finally got in were treated to sweatbox-like conditions and a very low chance of getting a pint at the bar.
The DJ’s at Happy Days played music with a distinct attitude. Records by Kerri Chandler, MK and E-Smooth were popular at both Ministry and Happy Days, but where Tony Humphries favored wailing diva vocals, the UK DJ’s played dub versions. What’s more the resident DJs – Matt Jam, Mickey Simms and Justin Cantor – were all playing house music much faster than the American jocks. “Those people had been raving from 10pm–8am, at Ministry, so I didn’t want to play at 120 BPM,” remembers Matt Jam. “They needed picking up a bit. That was the main reason I started pitching up my records, to keep that flow going.”
Perhaps there was something in the air in the early ‘90s – or, more likely, it was the pills that were knocking around – but the pace of almost all dance music in the UK was rapidly accelerating. (The hardcore / jungle scene had already heard BPM’s creep from 140 to 160 and over.) Masters At Work’s dub mixes played at +8 were especially huge at The Elephant & Castle. The result was a spaced out, sped-up version of New York garage perfect for weary dancers looking for a second wind at 10 AM. This was the primordial soup from where UK Garage would evolve.
It was sound that Matt Jam was already hearing in his head a few years before: The Jam Experience’s “Feel My Love,” produced in 1991, had the intricate drums and cut up vocals that were popular in the more raw end of New York Garage, but the twist was a huge, uniquely UK bassline that dominated proceedings. Garage records till that point had largely been polished, smooth and soulful. This had a bottom end that was positively ill mannered.
Unsurprisingly this heavy bass weight owes a lot to Matt’s cohorts in the hardcore scene. “One of my friends, the drum & bass producer Blame, came round my house. He listened to a track I was working on and he said, ‘Push the bass up, push the bass up!’ When I played it at The Elephant & Castle, that was it, the track shook the windows. The owner of the pub ran up to me and was suddenly telling me to turn the bass down. That was the first ever British garage record.”
The success of Happy Days quickly inspired new Sunday parties and spurred on the existing ones. Up-tempo, dubbed out garage became the soundtrack. The Park in Kennington, another questionable South London pub, started opening at 4pm. When that shut, many would head to Café De Paris or The Gass Club, perhaps the best remembered of the early UK Garage clubs. Within a year a tight knit Sunday scene had sprung up. The crowds were racially diverse, working class, and in the know. You’d have clubbers, still up from the night before, dancing next to gangsters. As Creed remembers, “It was kind of like being part of a club that no one else knew about.”
Creed, UK Garage’s first MC, knows the story of the Sunday scene better than almost anyone. He was an omnipresent force at all of the early UKG parties including Happy Days. Like many of the scene’s faces he’d already been raving for years when UKG was starting. “That Sunday scene, back in the day, the crowd were older. People in their 40’s and 50’s. Don’t get me wrong, there were people in their early 20’s, but the majority of the crowd was over 30’s. People, they dressed up: trousers, suit, a nice shirt. Girls would dress up in heels and that. In them clubs it was a champagne lifestyle. That was where it all came from.”
Creed had been MCing since the acid house days. Unlike many of his peers, he never gravitated toward hardcore or jungle, instead sticking with a house groove. He even occasionally hosted the garage room at AWOL. “At that time, in the circles I was in, there wasn’t any other MC’s. House DJs they weren’t used to working with MC and didn’t even want one. My main thing was I wasn’t trying to let the crowd know there was an MC. I wasn’t trying to take the spotlight from the DJ. I was just trying to blend in with the music, just spit on the bits where there was room to spit. The best compliment someone could say to me was, ‘Mate, I thought you were the record.’” Without Creed, it’s unlikely MCs would have become so intrinsic to the UK Garage sound.
Throughout the Sunday scene, a clique of like-minded DJs bounded together. Norris “Da Boss” Windross, Daryl B, Dominic “Spreadlove” and Hermit were just some of the early garage innovators who would play interchangeably in these venues. Clubs like Ministry had their own residents, and weren’t going to give newcomers get a chance, so the UKG DJs made their name by doing their own thing.
The one place that did support UKG was pirate radio. Girls FM and London Underground were two of the most well known pirates to jump on the new, British house sound. Jungle was huge on London pirate radio in the early ’90s, but even the most militant jungle pirates programmed chilled shows with house or rare groove. When a faster, more bass-led house sound came along, it simply fitted better than the more polished US vocal house.
By 1994 producers were making tracks pre-programmed to fit the Sunday scene and pirate radio. More so than anyone else, Grant Nelson’s releases on Nice ‘N’ Ripe perfected the aesthetic: cut up vocals, weighty sub bass, snappy, heavily swung snares and busy, flittering high hats. Soon DJs and producers outside the Sunday scene began to take notice of UK Garage. Matt Jam hooked up with Karl Brown, a former engineer with hardcore group Double Trouble, setting in stone a synergy between bumping US house and bass-ridden UK rave as Tuff Jam.
The Arches was the best UKG venue in the history of UKG.
Meanwhile, Happy Days was going from strength to strength. In the space of 18 months the party moved from The Elephant & Castle to the larger Frog & Nightgown and then to The Arches: a cavernous, 1,000 capacity warehouse space. The venue itself wasn’t unusual. The crowd was. There was a celebratory, hedonistic atmosphere that was completely in-the-moment. The fact that most people had work the next day rarely slowed the party down. Matt Jam makes no bones about it: “The Arches was the best UKG venue in the history of UKG.” Spoony, too, remembers The Arches fondly. As he told Bill Brewster in The Record Players, “You felt it. You felt the atmosphere you could bottle it. You opened the door, you took a deep breath and you were just hit by people dancing 500 percent. No one looking around caring who was in there. You felt you was always going to play a wicked set because the atmosphere wouldn’t let you put a foot wrong.”
The only UKG club that could rival Happy Days’ popularity in 1995 was The Gass Club. Here Dominic Spreadlove played early UK Garage, bumpy New York house and rave anthems like Lenny De Ice’s “We Are E.” The introduction of breakbeats to the garage mix foreshadowed the bump of 2-Step that would come to rule the garage scene from ’98 onward. Todd Terry purportedly coined the phrase “Speed Garage” at The Gass on a visit from the States.
By 1995 the “day of rest” was routinely anything but for many Londoners. The Sunday scene was no longer for insiders or for sleep allergic ravers. For many it was the biggest night of the week. A perfect analogy for how far things had moved from its US garage roots came when Tony Humphries was booked to play The Arches. As Matt remembers, “I love Tony Humphries, but the problem was that Tony Humphries is very vocal. In the Arches the vibe was dubby and faster. People didn’t give him a chance. As soon as he put his first record people were like, ‘Come on, speed it up!’ Tony to his credit, he just carried on. It was just in the wrong place at the wrong time.”
For some, this 1995 period is still talked about as the high water mark for the UK Garage. To this day, there’s a hugely successful retro Garage night simply named “Back To 95.” Alongside Happy Days, The Arches also hosted the first TwiceAsNice nights before the event moved to The Coliseum and then The End. Promoted by Steve Gordon, Twice As Nice took the Sunday scene to a whole new level of success attracting 1500+ UKG ravers weekly. More than being just a popular nightclub it captured the spirit of a British sub culture. In the late ’90’s there probably wasn’t a better club to be seen in. David Beckham even played a DJ set there. (Back to back with Dane Bowers, which kind of takes the glitz off the anecdote).
That part of the UK Garage story is well known. But what’s less known is how the infrastructure was built for such a night to exist in the first place. Happy Days was inarguably a big part of what made the Sunday scene what it was. Without it, UK Garage’s sound, culture and the attitude may have been very different.
Image credits - Ewen Spencer, from the book UKG

---

Title: Nightclubbing: Fabio and Grooverider’s Rage
Author: Laurent Fintoni
Date: 2015-07-21
URL: http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/07/nightclubbing-fabio-and-grooverider-rage

Nightclubbing: Fabio and Grooverider’s Rage
The late 1980s were a heady time in the UK. A generation was enjoying its own summer of love, opening up to new ways of thinking and partying. Amid the euphoria, some began to evolve the music that soundtracked this cultural and social revolution, seeking ever higher highs. House and techno were blended with hip hop, dub, disco and more to create the hardcore sound. As the ’90s rolled in, this fusion of drum machines, breaks, samples and synthesisers splintered even further. One of those directions was jungle, a music that came bursting out in the early ’90s with an infectious energy and undeniable impact.
Beyond the warehouse parties, countryside raves and pirate radio that fostered the early days of rave, one club night can be held up as the inception point for the birth of jungle in London. Rage was a weekly Thursday party that opened in October 1988 at Heaven, one of the capital’s largest nightclubs, and already home to early acid house parties such as Paul Oakenfold’s Spectrum. It was there that two unproven DJs by the name of Fabio and Grooverider hit upon a mix of ideas that proved unstoppable.
Fabio & Grooverider - Resident DJs
Kevin Millins - Promoter
Trevor Fung - Resident DJ
Storm - Metalheadz co-founder
Kevin Millins
Mark Moore, Danny Rampling and myself had been talking about doing a night with a different music policy.
Fabio
Kevin was big in the game. He had done a party called Babylon before Rage. It was amazing. Rage started around the time acid house blew up.
Kevin Millins
I’d done events at Heaven since 1981, including concerts with everyone from Culture Club to Joy Division. I’d been involved in music since the early 1970s, always being at the cutting edge. Rage came at the right time. I can’t explain it any other way. It felt right.
Trevor Fung
I was working at Heaven on Mondays for a night called Spectrum, with Paul Oakenfold. Paul and I grew up together and I’m the one who got him into DJing. I lived in Ibiza for three summers in 1983, 1984 and 1987, which is when we brought the whole summer of love thing to London.
Grooverider
We started DJing in the warehouse days, playing secret parties. That made us get a little following which led to Rage.
Kevin Millins
Rage started off with Danny Rampling and Mark and then progressed very quickly, ending with Trevor Fung and Colin Faver as the two main men. And then we’d have people come in and guest every week. Heaven had a hell of a track record, so it allowed us to get different people in.
Trevor Fung
I helped Kevin book the acts, people from all over the world: America, Italy, Germany… The best known names are the Americans, people like Derrick May
Fabio
We knew a girl who had some connection with the club and they wanted some guys to play upstairs, it was called the Star Bar. We didn’t think a lot of it.
Grooverider
They were testing us out.
Fabio
John Digweed would warm up for us, he was called JD at the time. Him and a guy called Dominic Spreadlove. And then we’d play 11 till 3 every Thursday.
Trevor Fung
The upstairs room held 1,000 people and downstairs 1,200. It was a big club. Richard Branson owned it at the time.
Kevin Millins
I’m a great believer in letting things take their course. Get the people involved you think will shape it right, the way you want it, and then you let it go. Put it all in the mix and see what comes out the other end.
Fabio
We’d play anything that was new. German techno, Belgian techno, early jungle, New York house. We just played the music we liked. We never sat down to plan it. Music came out, we’d buy it. We didn’t put labels to anything.
Grooverider
To us, it was all house music at the time. I had no idea it was called techno.
I remember someone telling me we’d never get anywhere if we didn’t play vocals. We stuck to our guns.
Trevor Fung
After about two years we stopped booking guest DJs because we had all become popular in our own right.
Kevin Millins
By chance, one week Trevor wasn’t working and Colin was sick. As a result Fabio and Groove got moved downstairs. And that’s how the changeover happened.
Fabio
We were surprised. You gotta remember downstairs was a mainstream house night. We would play a bit more underground. We weren’t sure how it would translate. But we did what we do and people loved it and Kevin gave us the job. We felt bad, but then we thought, “Fuck it.”
Trevor Fung
Fabio and Grooverider had more of an American and European influence, while Colin and I began to play a lot more techno around that time. It worked in our favour too, their audience was growing and ours was smaller as we got more into the techno sound.
Storm
Kemistry and I moved back to London in the late 1980s within a few months of each other. She was raving already, but I hadn’t discovered that world yet. She would go out regularly with this crew and they’d heard about these DJs playing at a club called Rage. It was so good that girls were taking their tops off.
Grooverider
When hip house began happening we started seeing more tracks with breakbeats. Hip house was the transition. It’s why we’re here today.
Fabio
We came from hip hop as well, we were always into the breakbeat element and found a way to play breaks into the sets. We’d play stuff like Fast Eddie Smith and Frankie Bones. We would take bits of the breaks and put them on top of tunes. It was madness. You know what, I don’t even know how we did it! In dem days our mixing wasn’t that tight…
Grooverider
We’d try to mix stuff together that wasn’t really meant to go. Pitch stuff up, madness all over the place.
Trevor Fung
I would also do work for labels at the time, and Frankie Bones and Lenny D were two of my favourite acts, we’d booked Frankie for the club a few times. I put them forward to XL Recordings, which is how Frankie got signed to them.
Fabio
We played underground jams, stuff by Frank De Wulf, Joey Beltram, Masters At Work. It was just the energy of it that people got into I think. We noticed people liked this mix of styles, so we did more and more of it.
Storm
The first time we went, we only caught the last hour or so of Grooverider, but it changed our lives. The next week we were there when the doors opened. We’d never found a club with two floors of music that was good.
Fabio
Don’t get me wrong, the proper house purists weren’t happy about it. I remember Kevin calling us one night and saying a lot of the guys who came down didn’t like the music anymore. He didn’t care though, he loved our music. It was so new and there was no other club in the world doing this at the time. He was feeling it.
Storm
When Kemistry met Goldie, he had come back from Miami. We told him about what he’d missed, how people from all walks of life and race and classes had been coming together to rave.
Fabio
The crowd was a kind of urban crowd with East London gangsters, street people… They were all into it.
Storm
That was the beauty of the dance, it broke down a lot of barriers. You’d go to Rage and you wouldn’t see people getting off with each other, it was more turning to someone and talking about the music. The only contacts were offering people water. It was about the music.
Fabio
The tunes that were more break-y were the ones. B-sides with more underground dubs. We looked for the B-sides always. No A-sides, no vocals.
Grooverider
The radio mix never got played!
Fabio
I remember someone telling me we’d never get anywhere if we didn’t play vocals. We stuck to our guns. No awareness. Didn’t give a monkeys, played the tunes we liked.
Storm
They were doing something a lot of DJs at the time told them would never work. That mix of styles and approach just wasn’t popular at the time. We became obsessed with it. It was a place to get your fix on a Thursday, till 3 AM, so not too late. Fabio and Groove had different styles, so you got it all in one night. We went for a whole year every week, going to work the next day with a massive smile on our face.
Grooverider
“We Are i.e.” changed the game. After that, people started to talk about jungle.
Fabio
Ibiza Records, Potential Bad Boy, “Mister Kirk’s Nightmare”… There weren’t many of these tunes, but we found them.
Storm
The story of jungle plays out in all these tunes. It’s quite a beautiful story, the way you would have to get them from different places.
Grooverider
“Go” by Moby was a massive tune also, changed a lot of shit.
Fabio
And then before you knew it, it was a whole movement. I don’t even know how that happens. We were getting more and more jungle tunes every week and the movement happened.
Storm
Producers in England, like the Ragga Twins and the whole Reinforced crew, were trying to create what Groove and Fabio were putting in the mix with techno, acid and house all together. It wasn’t the best quality, but it didn’t matter in the beginning because you had a big sound system to push it on.
Kevin Millins
Sound systems have always been one of my things, and I was responsible for the one at Heaven. I had a particular thing for the Blue Box Turbo Sound, the original system they had at Glastonbury, and which I’d also use at the big raves. The chap who designed them had made a wide throw, short distance system, which was perfect for Heaven. He was a bit of a sound system guru in the 1980s, he was the man everyone wanted to design their systems and he loved the club.
Storm
Rage had an amazing sound system, big bass bins on the floor and mids and tops flying around the balcony. I’ve not heard many sound systems like it in my whole career. Everything about it was perfect. And the lighting in there… that was the first time we experienced the whole assault on the senses. Each week they’d bring something new.
Kevin Millins
I also looked after all the decor and The Mutoid Waste Company built a giant… I don’t know what you’d call it, a metal creature, for the dancefloor of the upstairs bar.
Fabio
It was a big club for a Thursday, too. Special vibes.
Grooverider
How we pulled it off on a Thursday with people going to work Friday... it’s insane.
Kevin Millins
Rage was on a Thursday because you do clubs in the week, not the weekend. If you want the creative people, the ones who make things happen, they don’t have to wait for the weekend to go out and don’t necessarily have to get up in the morning. They’re not mainstream people. I’ve done big rave events on weekends, but with clubs it was always Monday to Thursday when possible. That’s where you build stuff from. It’s how it works in my opinion. New York was similar at the time, as was Paris.
Storm
It became our religion. If we had to miss a week, there were tears. It shaped a whole way for people to come and listen to the music. Goldie was infected by it like we were. We would come home from Rage and he was like, “Right, I’m gonna make this music, you two are going to play it, we’re gonna make a label, we’re going to find a club.”
Fabio
We had a friend called Danny Jungle. He’d say “jungle” when we played breakbeat tunes and he was the one who would get the crowd shouting “jungle!”
Grooverider
He coined the term.
Fabio
And then it became a thing that before we played jungle tracks people would scream for it. Danny Jungle has a lot to answer for. I think he’s a brickie now.
Grooverider
House husband!
Fabio
That’s right. House husband. He has no idea what he started.
Storm
We were calling it hardcore at the time. We’d find pirate radio shows that played this music and look for other venues like Rage, which led us to Coventry where Doc Scott was playing. I think what Fabio and Groove did sparked others to try to put on that music. They led the way, alongside people like Bryan Gee, LTJ Bukem and Mickey Finn.
Kevin Millins
People like Goldie came out of Rage. I would say it was an inception point for the idea of jungle in London. I knew something was in the air. At one point, Rage became the weekly meeting point for everyone. That lasted a few years. Everyone connected to the rave scene would come and hang out.
Storm
When I look back at it, that small thing at Rage spawned careers. It’s quite magical. They opened your ears and eyes to different music. And that’s why I always say drum & bass was a bastardisation of all music. We took from everything and brought it into a new format.
Trevor Fung
It’s quite funny that this would become the birthplace of drum & bass. Rage was really known for all kinds of music. Jungle came out of it, but we were doing all sorts of things: Italian house, Balearic, American house… Fabio and Groove built on that.
Storm
And all of a sudden more and more people in the UK were making this sound that was being patched together by Groove and Fabio and others. It was such an important and pivotal club, I don’t know where we would be without it.
Fabio
We used to get 30 pounds for that, each. And I remember once Kevin said we’d get a rise and gave us fifty quid.
Grooverider
We didn’t realise he was getting thousands of people through the door every week. Never thought about it.
The fact people still talk about Rage today is quite astonishing.
Fabio
Tenner on the door, he was cleaning grands a week and we’d get 50 quid. We were well happy.
Grooverider
When people talk about money, they have no idea what we went through.
Fabio
We just wanted to play music.
Kevin Millins
By 1993 Rage had begun to fizzle out. You close a club before it dies. It had its own momentum, a bit of a legend built up around it, and the last thing you want to do is let that die and thus destroy what you created. Closing it while still full means you end up with something people remember and talk about fondly. The effect and impact can be forgotten if you allow it to drift and die.
Fabio
I think it was November. Kevin called and said he didn’t want to do it no more. We were gutted, but we were young so we didn’t care.
Grooverider
We were doing so much other stuff at this point.
Fabio
We had no idea. Couldn’t imagine people would still want to talk about it 22 years later. It was a job to us. The fact people still talk about it today is quite astonishing. Certain Thursdays we couldn’t even be arsed to go.

---

Title: Interview: ClekClekBoom - Paris Musique Club
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2015-11-05
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/11/clekclekboom-paris-musique-club-interview/

Interview: ClekClekBoom - Paris Musique Club
The Parisian crew talks about their label and upcoming residency at Paris Musique Club
A major fixture on the Parisian club scene, ClekClekBoom have contributed to the renewal of French electronic music over these last few years, through several techno, EDM and bass music releases given a warm welcome by music critics and DJs alike. On the eve of their four-day residency at la Gaité lyrique, as part of the Paris Musique Club exhibition, they have joined us to answer a few questions.
How was ClekClekBoom founded?
After we launched our eponymous site in 2007, which at the time featured the music of international artists geared towards urban club music, we figured that in 2011, it would be necessary for us to become a proper label. As we’d spent several years scouring record shops, we always had a lot of love for vinyl itself. The adventure genuinely took shape when released our first record, when we actually got to hold the first 12-inch between our fingers.
How is the label structured?
ClekClekBoom comes together around Adrien “Boo” and Jonathan “Ministre X,” and up until now, the musical curation is entirely in the hands of French Fries. We’ve always enjoyed working as a team, taking care to respect the tastes of each member, and trying to get as close as possible to what each artist actually wants. We also share our workspace with Monoburo (Romain Cieutat & Jérome Hervé).
Romain Cieutat, who is in charge of the artistic directorship of your videos...
Romain has always worked alongside us, accompanying our aesthetic choices through the videos he directs himself, whether it’s party footage, a pop video, or more recently, visual experiments such as the animated anamorphosis for Paris Club Music Volume 3 (our latest compilation).
Is the use of video an obligation for a label today?
It seems vital to us, as it allows us to accompany and add visual precision to our musical whims. It’s artistic expression that also brings coherence to our general aesthetic. This exercise isn’t mandatory, but it has become an essential promotional tool. Personally, beyond the commercial aspects, we have always been interested in developing this side of our work. Cieutat has been with us from the very beginning and has always had modular responses, which question the relationship between the real and the abstract, the physical and the digital.
Is there a project you are particularly proud of?
Our last birthday party was certainly an event that summed up our quest for beautiful music made in the best possible conditions. It took place last May, at Gaité lyrique actually. It gave us the opportunity to bring together all the producers and DJs on the label for a massive back-2-back set that lasted until dawn. This event also allowed NSDOS to present his superb project, “Clubbing Sequence,” for the first time ever – a combination of contemporary dance and interactive live features capturing the movements of the audience. Musically, it was really exciting to tell our story all of us, together, for a few hours.
A birthday that coined a video device too.
Monoburo had created a 360° immersive movie especially for the event, using the technical infrastructure of the main hall at the Gaité lyrique to the best of its abilities... a visual experience they called “Artefact” – a really striking piece of work on the digitalisation of our environment, a movement from the organic to the computerized.
Your compilation series is called Paris Club Music, how would you describe Paris and its artistic scene to a foreigner?
Musically speaking, Paris is really exciting at the moment; its labels and events are thriving. The organisers as well as the public are really getting back to basics, with an inquisitiveness and demands in terms of quality which allow us to push things forward. There’s also the fact that we no longer have to cross the channel or to go to Bavaria to access club nights with a proper line-up that commands respect. This re-enforces this feeling that Paris has reclaimed its rightful title as one of the great nightspots of the world.
What’s your motto?
“United we stand, divided we fall” or “Keep sailing through stormy seas.”

---

Title: Interview: La Souterraine — Paris Musique Club
Author: Red Bull Music Academy
Date: 2015-11-12
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/11/interview-la-souterraine-paris-musique-club/

Interview: La Souterraine — Paris Musique Club
Through their free downloads and FM radio show, la Souterraine scour the four corners of the French-speaking world on a mission to uncover the forgotten treasures of its underground pop scenes. Just before the release of their eighth compilation, the collective have moved into the basement art space in la Gaîté lyrique as part of the Paris Musique Club exhibition: to curate a series of concerts, projections, workshops and projects, from Thursday to Sunday. We caught up with la Souterraine to find our more about them, and the Paris Musique Club project.
Why did you launch La Souterraine?
Basically, in the French pop world at the time, there weren’t that many people ready and willing to take a chance on the bands that we liked. We thought that we had this little window of opportunity to spread our vision of the French underground pop scene across the world – and without any constraints, since all of the content on www.souterraine.biz is available for free.
Who is behind La Souterraine?
The basic idea was to bring together knowledgable people who were willing to devote their time to the cause. Laurent Bajon is a crate digger and an expert in new sounds. He presents our show, on Radio Campus Paris, La Souterraine. Benjamin Caschera co-manages Almost Musique, a label and publisher, and he’s also a media co-ordinator. There are other people involved, too: Rémy Poncet (Chevalrex / BrestBrestBrest) takes care of our visual identity and of the Souterraine parties, Sébastien Trihan of our VOL. multi-artist compilations, and Clément Haslé did the line-ups for the first 30 Souterraine parties at the Olympic.
How would you describe Paris and its music scene to a foreigner?
There are infinite artists and scenes, but there’s no real structure. They’re organised in a really atomised way, and there aren’t that many spaces for the underground to express itself in.
What’s your motto?
Either FRENCH POP UNDERGROUND, or “La Souterraine are a minority, that minority is everybody.”

---

Title: Gaika, Lafawndah and More Unleashed Their Magic in Torino on Our Club To Club Stage
Author: Mauro Puccini
Date: 2016-11-11
URL: https://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2016/11/gallery-club-to-club-festival-2016/

Gaika, Lafawndah and More Unleashed Their Magic in Torino on Our Club To Club Stage Daphni, Clams Casino, Toxe and Mura Masa also feature in our festival gallery Lafawndah Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Toxe Mauro Puccini Clams Casino Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Daphni Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Gaika Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Clams Casino Mauro Puccini Kablam Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Mauro Puccini Gaika Mauro Puccini Lafawndah Mauro Puccini By Mauro Puccini on November 11, 2016
